What is anxiety?
Anxiety is a feeling of fear, dread, and uneasiness. It might cause you to sweat, feel restless and tense, and have a rapid heartbeat. It can be a normal reaction to stress. For example, you might feel anxious when faced with a difficult problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. It can help you to cope. The anxiety may give you a boost of energy or help you focus. But for people with anxiety disorders, the fear is not temporary and can be overwhelming.

What are anxiety disorders?
Anxiety disorders are conditions in which you have anxiety that does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, schoolwork, and relationships.

What are the types of anxiety disorders?
There are several types of anxiety disorders, including:

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). People with GAD worry about ordinary issues such as health, money, work, and family. But their worries are excessive, and they have them almost every day for at least 6 months.
Panic disorder. People with panic disorder have panic attacks. These are sudden, repeated periods of intense fear when there is no danger. The attacks come on quickly and can last several minutes or more.
Phobias. People with phobias have an intense fear of something that poses little or no actual danger. Their fear may be about spiders, flying, going to crowded places, or being in social situations (known as social anxiety).
What causes anxiety disorders?
The cause of anxiety is unknown. Factors such as genetics, brain biology and chemistry, stress, and your environment may play a role.

Who is at risk for anxiety disorders?
The risk factors for the different types of anxiety disorders can vary. For example, GAD and phobias are more common in women, but social anxiety affects men and women equally. There are some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders, including:

Certain personality traits, such as being shy or withdrawn when you are in new situations or meeting new people
Traumatic events in early childhood or adulthood
Family history of anxiety or other mental disorders
Some physical health conditions, such as thyroid problems or arrhythmia
What are the symptoms of anxiety disorders?
The different types of anxiety disorders can have different symptoms. But they all have a combination of:

Anxious thoughts or beliefs that are hard to control. They make you feel restless and tense and interfere with your daily life. They do not go away and can get worse over time.
Physical symptoms, such as a pounding or rapid heartbeat, unexplained aches and pains, dizziness, and shortness of breath
Changes in behavior, such as avoiding everyday activities you used to do
Using caffeine, other substances, and certain medicines can make your symptoms worse.

How are anxiety disorders diagnosed?
To diagnose anxiety disorders, your health care provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. You may also have a physical exam and lab tests to make sure that a different health problem is not the cause of your symptoms.

If you don't have another health problem, you will get a psychological evaluation. Your provider may do it, or you may be referred to a mental health professional to get one.

What are the treatments for anxiety disorders?
The main treatments for anxiety disorders are psychotherapy (talk therapy), medicines, or both:

Psychotherapy can help you recognize and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. To be effective, it should focus on your specific anxieties and needs. There are many types; some of the types used for anxiety disorders include:
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), which teaches you different ways of thinking and behaving. It can help you change how you react to the things that cause you to feel fear and anxiety. It may include exposure therapy. This therapy focuses on having you confront your fears so that you will be able to do the things that you had been avoiding.
Acceptance and commitment therapy may help with some anxiety disorders. It uses strategies such as mindfulness and goal setting to reduce discomfort and anxiety.
Medicines to treat anxiety disorders include anti-anxiety medicines and certain antidepressants. Some types of medicines may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders. You should work closely with your provider to identify which medicine is best for you. You may need to try more than one medicine before you can find the right one.
Support groups and stress management techniques may also be helpful.
Anxiety Disorders
What is anxiety?
Occasional anxiety is a normal part of life. Many people worry about things such as health, money, or family problems. But anxiety disorders involve more than temporary worry or fear. For people with an anxiety disorder, the anxiety does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, schoolwork, and relationships.

There are several types of anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, and various phobia-related disorders.

What are the signs and symptoms of anxiety?
Generalized anxiety disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) usually involves a persistent feeling of anxiety or dread, which can interfere with daily life. It is not the same as occasionally worrying about things or experiencing anxiety due to stressful life events. People living with GAD experience frequent anxiety for months, if not years.

Symptoms of GAD include:

Feeling restless, wound-up, or on-edge
Being easily fatigued
Having difficulty concentrating
Being irritable
Having headaches, muscle aches, stomachaches, or unexplained pains
Difficulty controlling feelings of worry
Having sleep problems, such as difficulty falling or staying asleep
Panic disorder
People with panic disorder have frequent and unexpected panic attacks. Panic attacks are sudden periods of intense fear, discomfort, or sense of losing control even when there is no clear danger or trigger. Not everyone who experiences a panic attack will develop panic disorder.

During a panic attack, a person may experience:

Pounding or racing heart
Sweating
Trembling or tingling
Chest pain
Feelings of impending doom
Feelings of being out of control
People with panic disorder often worry about when the next attack will happen and actively try to prevent future attacks by avoiding places, situations, or behaviors they associate with panic attacks. Panic attacks can occur as frequently as several times a day or as rarely as a few times a year.

Social anxiety disorder
Social anxiety disorder is an intense, persistent fear of being watched and judged by others. For people with social anxiety disorder, the fear of social situations may feel so intense that it seems beyond their control. For some people, this fear may get in the way of going to work, attending school, or doing everyday things.

People with social anxiety disorder may experience:

Blushing, sweating, or trembling
Pounding or racing heart
Stomachaches
Rigid body posture or speaking with an overly soft voice
Difficulty making eye contact or being around people they don’t know
Feelings of self-consciousness or fear that people will judge them negatively
Phobia-related disorders
A phobia is an intense fear of—or aversion to—specific objects or situations. Although it can be realistic to be anxious in some circumstances, the fear people with phobias feel is out of proportion to the actual danger caused by the situation or object.

People with a phobia:

May have an irrational or excessive worry about encountering the feared object or situation
Take active steps to avoid the feared object or situation
Experience immediate intense anxiety upon encountering the feared object or situation
Endure unavoidable objects and situations with intense anxiety
There are several types of phobias and phobia-related disorders:

Specific Phobias (sometimes called simple phobias): As the name suggests, people who have a specific phobia have an intense fear of, or feel intense anxiety about, specific types of objects or situations. Some examples of specific phobias include the fear of:

Flying
Heights
Specific animals, such as spiders, dogs, or snakes
Receiving injections
Blood
Social anxiety disorder (previously called social phobia): People with social anxiety disorder have a general intense fear of, or anxiety toward, social or performance situations. They worry that actions or behaviors associated with their anxiety will be negatively evaluated by others, leading them to feel embarrassed. This worry often causes people with social anxiety to avoid social situations. Social anxiety disorder can manifest in a range of situations, such as within the workplace or the school environment.

Agoraphobia: People with agoraphobia have an intense fear of two or more of the following situations:

Using public transportation
Being in open spaces
Being in enclosed spaces
Standing in line or being in a crowd
Being outside of the home alone
People with agoraphobia often avoid these situations, in part, because they think being able to leave might be difficult or impossible in the event they have panic-like reactions or other embarrassing symptoms. In the most severe form of agoraphobia, an individual can become housebound.

Separation anxiety disorder: Separation anxiety is often thought of as something that only children deal with. However, adults can also be diagnosed with separation anxiety disorder. People with separation anxiety disorder fear being away from the people they are close to. They often worry that something bad might happen to their loved ones while they are not together. This fear makes them avoid being alone or away from their loved ones. They may have bad dreams about being separated or feel unwell when separation is about to happen.

Selective mutism: A somewhat rare disorder associated with anxiety is selective mutism. Selective mutism occurs when people fail to speak in specific social situations despite having normal language skills. Selective mutism usually occurs before the age of 5 and is often associated with extreme shyness, fear of social embarrassment, compulsive traits, withdrawal, clinging behavior, and temper tantrums. People diagnosed with selective mutism are often also diagnosed with other anxiety disorders.

What are the risk factors for anxiety?
Researchers are finding that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to the risk of developing an anxiety disorder.

The risk factors for each type of anxiety disorder vary. However, some general risk factors include:

Shyness or feeling distressed or nervous in new situations in childhood
Exposure to stressful and negative life or environmental events
A history of anxiety or other mental disorders in biological relatives
Anxiety symptoms can be produced or aggravated by:

Some physical health conditions, such as thyroid problems or heart arrhythmia
Caffeine or other substances/medications
If you think you may have an anxiety disorder, getting a physical examination from a health care provider may help them diagnose your symptoms and find the right treatment.

How is anxiety treated?
Anxiety disorders are generally treated with psychotherapy, medication, or both. There are many ways to treat anxiety, and you should work with a health care provider to choose the best treatment for you.

Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help people with anxiety disorders. To be effective, psychotherapy must be directed at your specific anxieties and tailored to your needs.

Cognitive behavioral therapy

Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is an example of one type of psychotherapy that can help people with anxiety disorders. It teaches people different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to situations to help you feel less anxious and fearful. CBT has been well studied and is the gold standard for psychotherapy.

Exposure therapy is a CBT method that is used to treat anxiety disorders. Exposure therapy focuses on confronting the fears underlying an anxiety disorder to help people engage in activities they have been avoiding. Exposure therapy is sometimes used along with relaxation exercises.

Acceptance and commitment therapy

Another treatment option for some anxiety disorders is acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT). ACT takes a different approach than CBT to negative thoughts. It uses strategies such as mindfulness and goal setting to reduce discomfort and anxiety. Compared to CBT, ACT is a newer form of psychotherapy treatment, so less data are available on its effectiveness.

Medication
Medication does not cure anxiety disorders but can help relieve symptoms. Health care providers, such as a psychiatrist or primary care provider, can prescribe medication for anxiety. Some states also allow psychologists who have received specialized training to prescribe psychiatric medications. The most common classes of medications used to combat anxiety disorders are antidepressants, anti-anxiety medications (such as benzodiazepines), and beta-blockers.

Antidepressants

Antidepressants are used to treat depression, but they can also be helpful for treating anxiety disorders. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects.

Antidepressants can take several weeks to start working so it’s important to give the medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a health care provider. Your provider can help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.

In some cases, children, teenagers, and adults younger than 25 may experience increased suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressant medications, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. Because of this, people of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.

Anti-anxiety medications

Anti-anxiety medications can help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Although benzodiazepines are sometimes used as first-line treatments for generalized anxiety disorder, they have both benefits and drawbacks.

Benzodiazepines are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than antidepressant medications. However, some people build up a tolerance to these medications and need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people even become dependent on them.

To avoid these problems, health care providers usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods of time.

If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms, or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly. Your provider can help you slowly and safely decrease your dose.

Beta-blockers

Although beta-blockers are most often used to treat high blood pressure, they can help relieve the physical symptoms of anxiety, such as rapid heartbeat, shaking, trembling, and blushing. These medications can help people keep physical symptoms under control when taken for short periods. They can also be used “as needed” to reduce acute anxiety, including to prevent some predictable forms of performance anxieties.

Choosing the right medication

Some types of drugs may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders, so people should work closely with a health care provider to identify which medication is best for them. Certain substances such as caffeine, some over-the-counter cold medicines, illicit drugs, and herbal supplements may aggravate the symptoms of anxiety disorders or interact with prescribed medication. People should talk with a health care provider, so they can learn which substances are safe and which to avoid.

Choosing the right medication, medication dose, and treatment plan should be done under an expert’s care and should be based on a person’s needs and their medical situation. Your and your provider may try several medicines before finding the right one.

Support groups
Some people with anxiety disorders might benefit from joining a self-help or support group and sharing their problems and achievements with others. Support groups are available both in person and online. However, any advice you receive from a support group member should be used cautiously and does not replace treatment recommendations from a health care provider.

Stress management techniques
Stress management techniques, such as exercise, mindfulness, and meditation, also can reduce anxiety symptoms and enhance the effects of psychotherapy. You can learn more about how these techniques benefit your treatment by talking with a health care provider.

How can I find a clinical trial for anxiety?
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individuals may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.

Researchers at NIMH and around the country conduct many studies with patients and healthy volunteers. We have new and better treatment options today because of what clinical trials uncovered years ago. Be part of tomorrow’s medical breakthroughs. Talk to your health care provider about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you.
Anxiety disorders
Anxiety is a normal response to stress. But when it becomes hard to control and affects your day-to-day life, it can be disabling. Anxiety disorders affect nearly 1 in 5 adults in the United States.1 Women are more than twice as likely as men to get an anxiety disorder in their lifetime.2 Anxiety disorders are often treated with counseling, medicine, or a combination of both. Some women also find that yoga or meditation helps with anxiety disorders.

Collapse All
What is anxiety?
Anxiety is a feeling of worry, nervousness, or fear about an event or situation. It is a normal reaction to stress. It helps you stay alert for a challenging situation at work, study harder for an exam, or remain focused on an important speech. In general, it helps you cope.

But anxiety can be disabling if it interferes with daily life, such as making you dread nonthreatening day-to-day activities like riding the bus or talking to a coworker. Anxiety can also be a sudden attack of terror when there is no threat.

What are anxiety disorders?
Anxiety disorders happen when excessive anxiety interferes with your everyday activities such as going to work or school or spending time with friends or family. Anxiety disorders are serious mental illnesses. They are the most common mental disorders in the United States. Anxiety disorders are more than twice as common in women as in men.

What are the major types of anxiety disorder?
The major types of anxiety disorder are:

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). People with GAD worry excessively about ordinary, day-to-day issues, such as health, money, work, and family. With GAD, the mind often jumps to the worst-case scenario, even when there is little or no reason to worry. Women with GAD may be anxious about just getting through the day. They may have muscle tension and other stress-related physical symptoms, such as trouble sleeping or upset stomach. At times, worrying keeps people with GAD from doing everyday tasks. Women with GAD have a higher risk of depression and other anxiety disorders than men with GAD. They also are more likely to have a family history of depression.3
Panic disorder. Panic disorders are twice as common in women as in men.4 People with panic disorder have sudden attacks of terror when there is no actual danger. Panic attacks may cause a sense of unreality, a fear of impending doom, or a fear of losing control. A fear of one’s own unexplained physical symptoms is also a sign of panic disorder. People having panic attacks sometimes believe they are having heart attacks, losing their minds, or dying.
Social phobia. Social phobia, also called social anxiety disorder, is diagnosed when people become very anxious and self-conscious in everyday social situations. People with social phobia have a strong fear of being watched and judged by others. They may get embarrassed easily and often have panic attack symptoms.
Specific phobia. A specific phobia is an intense fear of something that poses little or no actual danger. Specific phobias could be fears of closed-in spaces, heights, water, objects, animals, or specific situations. People with specific phobias often find that facing, or even thinking about facing, the feared object or situation brings on a panic attack or severe anxiety.
Some other conditions that are not considered anxiety disorders but are similar include:

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). People with OCD have unwanted thoughts (obsessions) or behaviors (compulsions) that cause anxiety. They may check the oven or iron again and again or perform the same routine over and over to control the anxiety these thoughts cause. Often, the rituals end up controlling the person.
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). PTSD starts after a scary event that involved physical harm or the threat of physical harm. The person who gets PTSD may have been the one who was harmed, or the harm may have happened to a loved one or even a stranger.
Who gets anxiety disorders?
Anxiety disorders affect about 40 million American adults every year. Anxiety disorders also affect children and teens. About 8% of teens ages 13 to 18 have an anxiety disorder, with symptoms starting around age 6.5

Women are more than twice as likely as men to get an anxiety disorder in their lifetime.2 Also, some types of anxiety disorders affect some women more than others:

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) affects more American Indian/Alaskan Native women than women of other races and ethnicities. GAD also affects more white women and Hispanic women than Asian or African-American women.6
Social phobia and panic disorder affect more white women than women of other races and ethnicities.7
What causes anxiety disorders?
Researchers think anxiety disorders are caused by a combination of factors, which may include:

Hormonal changes during the menstrual cycle
Genetics. Anxiety disorders may run in families.
Traumatic events. Experiencing abuse, an attack, or sexual assault can lead to serious health problems, including anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, and depression. 
What are the signs and symptoms of an anxiety disorder?
Women with anxiety disorders experience a combination of anxious thoughts or beliefs, physical symptoms, and changes in behavior, including avoiding everyday activities they used to do. Each anxiety disorder has different symptoms. They all involve a fear and dread about things that may happen now or in the future.

Physical symptoms may include:

Weakness
Shortness of breath
Rapid heart rate
Nausea
Upset stomach
Hot flashes
Dizziness
Physical symptoms of anxiety disorders often happen along with other mental or physical illnesses. This can cover up your anxiety symptoms or make them worse.2

How are anxiety disorders diagnosed?
Your doctor or nurse will ask you questions about your symptoms and your medical history. Your doctor may also do a physical exam or other tests to rule out other health problems that could be causing your symptoms.

Anxiety disorders are diagnosed when fear and dread of nonthreatening situations, events, places, or objects become excessive and are uncontrollable. Anxiety disorders are also diagnosed if the anxiety has lasted for at least six months and it interferes with social, work, family, or other aspects of daily life.2

How are anxiety disorders treated?
Treatment for anxiety disorders depends on the type of anxiety disorder you have and your personal history of health problems, violence, or abuse.

Often, treatment may include:

Counseling (called psychotherapy)
Medicine
A combination of counseling and medicine  
How does counseling help treat anxiety disorders?
Your doctor may refer you for a type of counseling for anxiety disorders called cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). You can talk to a trained mental health professional about what caused your anxiety disorder and how to deal with the symptoms.2

For example, you can talk to a psychiatrist, psychologist, social worker, or counselor. CBT can help you change the thinking patterns around your fears. It may help you change the way you react to situations that may create anxiety. You may also learn ways to reduce feelings of anxiety and improve specific behaviors caused by chronic anxiety. These strategies may include relaxation therapy and problem solving.

What types of medicine treat anxiety disorders?
Several types of medicine treat anxiety disorders. These include:

Antianxiety (benzodiazepines). These medicines are usually prescribed for short periods of time because they are addictive. Stopping this medicine too quickly can cause withdrawal symptoms.
Beta blockers. These medicines can help prevent the physical symptoms of an anxiety disorder, like trembling or sweating.8
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). SSRIs change the level of serotonin in the brain.2 They increase the amount of serotonin available to help brain cells communicate with each other. Common side effects can include insomnia or sedation, stomach problems, and a lack of sexual desire.
Tricyclics. Tricylics work like SSRIs. But sometimes they cause more side effects than SSRIs. They may cause dizziness, drowsiness, dry mouth, constipation, or weight gain.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). People who take MAOIs must avoid certain foods and drinks (like Parmesan or cheddar cheese and red wine) that contain an amino acid called tyramine. Taking an MAOI and eating these foods can cause blood pressure levels to spike dangerously. Women who take MAOIs must also avoid certain medicines, such as some types of birth control pills, pain relievers, and cold and allergy medicines.12 Talk to your doctor about any medicine you take.
All medicines have risks. You should talk to your doctor about the benefits and risks of all medicines. Learn more about medicines to treat anxiety disorders.

What if my anxiety disorder treatment is not working?
Sometimes, you may need to work with your doctor to try several different treatments or combinations of treatments before you find one that works for you.

If you are having trouble with side effects from medicines, talk to your doctor or nurse. Do not stop taking your medicine without talking to a doctor or nurse. Your doctor may adjust how much medicine you take and when you take it.

What if my anxiety disorder comes back?
Sometimes symptoms of an anxiety disorder come back after you have finished treatment. This may happen during or after a stressful event. It may also happen without any warning.

Many people with anxiety disorders do get better with treatment. But, if your symptoms come back, your doctor will work with you to change or adjust your medicine or treatment plan.

You can also talk to your doctor about ways to identify and prevent anxiety from coming back. This may include writing down your feelings or meeting with your counselor if you think your anxiety is uncontrollable.

Can complementary or alternative medicine help manage anxiety disorders?
Maybe. Some women say that complementary or alternative medicine (CAM) therapies helped lower their anxiety.

CAM therapies that may help anxiety include:

Physical activity. Regular physical activity raises the level of brain chemicals that control mood and affect anxiety and depression.9 Many studies show that all types of physical activity, including yoga and Tai Chi, help reduce anxiety.10
Meditation. Studies show meditation may improve anxiety.11 Regular meditation may help by boosting activity in the area of your brain responsible for feelings of serenity and joy.
Learn more about CAM therapies for anxiety disorders.

Will my anxiety disorder treatment affect my pregnancy?
If your treatment is counseling, it will not affect your pregnancy.

If you are on medicine to treat your anxiety disorder, talk to your doctor. Some medicines used to treat anxiety can affect your unborn baby.

If I take medicine to treat my anxiety disorder, can I breastfeed my baby?
It depends. Some medicines used to treat anxiety can pass through breastmilk. Certain antidepressants, such as some SSRIs, are safe to take during breastfeeding.

Do not stop taking your medicine too quickly. Talk to your doctor to find out what medicine is best for you and your baby. Learn more about medicines and breastfeeding in our Breastfeeding section. You can also enter your medicine into the LactMed® database to find out if your medicine passes through your breastmilk and any possible side effects for your nursing baby.

How do anxiety disorders affect other health conditions?
Anxiety disorders may affect other health problems that are common in women. These include:

Depression. Anxiety disorders can happen at the same time as depression. When this happens, treatment for both anxiety and depression may not be as effective. You may need a combination of treatments, such as counseling and medicine.
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). IBS symptoms are common in people with anxiety disorders. Generalized anxiety disorder is also common among people with IBS.12 Worry can make IBS symptoms worse, especially gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms such as upset stomach or gas. GI symptoms can also be stressful and lead to more anxiety. Although treatments for IBS can help treat anxiety, it’s important that you treat both conditions.13
Chronic pain. Anxiety disorders are common in women with certain diseases that cause chronic pain, including rheumatoid arthritis, fibromyalgia, and migraine.
Cardiovascular disease. Anxiety and depression increase the risk for heart disease, the leading cause of death for American women. Anxiety can also make recovery harder after a heart attack or stroke.
Asthma. Studies link asthma to anxiety disorders. Stress and anxiety can trigger asthma attacks while the shortness of breath and wheezing during asthma attacks can cause anxiety. Studies show that breathing retraining may help asthma control and ease anxiety.14
What is the latest research on anxiety disorders and women?
Researchers are studying why women are more than twice as likely as men to develop anxiety disorders and depression. Changes in levels of the hormone estrogen throughout a woman's menstrual cycle and reproductive life (during the years a woman can have a baby) probably play a role.

Researchers also recently studied the male hormone testosterone, which is found in women and men but typically in higher levels in men. They found that treatment with testosterone had similar effects as antianxiety and antidepressant medicine for the women in the study.15

Other research focuses on anxiety disorders and depression during and after pregnancy and among overweight and obese women. For more clinical trials related to anxiety disorders and women, visit ClinicalTrials.gov.
For more information on anxiety disorders, call the OWH Helpline at 1-800-994-9662 or contact the following organizations:

MentalHealth.gov, HHS
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), NIH, HHS 
Phone Number: 866-615-6464
Anxiety and Depression Association of America  
 Phone Number: 240-485-1001
National Alliance on Mental Illness 
Phone Number: 800-950-6264
National Mental Health Consumers' Self-Help Clearinghouse  
Phone Number: 800-553-4539
Understanding Anxiety Disorders
When Panic, Fear, and Worries Overwhelm

En españolSend us your comments(link sends e-mail)
Illustration of a worried man standing apart from a circle of friends.
Many of us worry from time to time. We fret over finances, feel anxious about job interviews, or get nervous about social gatherings. These feelings can be normal or even helpful. They may give us a boost of energy or help us focus. But for people with anxiety disorders, they can be overwhelming.

Anxiety disorders affect nearly 1 in 5 American adults each year. People with these disorders have feelings of fear and uncertainty that interfere with everyday activities and last for 6 months or more. Anxiety disorders can also raise your risk for other medical problems such as heart disease, diabetes, substance abuse, and depression.

The good news is that most anxiety disorders get better with therapy. The course of treatment depends on the type of anxiety disorder. Medications, psychotherapy (“talk therapy”), or a combination of both can usually relieve troubling symptoms.

“Anxiety disorders are one of the most treatable mental health problems we see,” says Dr. Daniel Pine, an NIH neuroscientist and psychiatrist. “Still, for reasons we don’t fully understand, most people who have these problems don’t get the treatments that could really help them.”

One of the most common types of anxiety disorder is social anxiety disorder, or social phobia. It affects both women and men equally—a total of about 15 million U.S. adults. Without treatment, social phobia can last for years or even a lifetime. People with social phobia may worry for days or weeks before a social event. They’re often embarrassed, self-conscious, and afraid of being judged. They find it hard to talk to others. They may blush, sweat, tremble, or feel sick to their stomach when around other people.

Other common types of anxiety disorders include generalized anxiety disorder, which affects nearly 7 million American adults, and panic disorder, which affects about 6 million. Both are twice as common in women as in men.

People with generalized anxiety disorder worry endlessly over everyday issues—like health, money, or family problems—even if they realize there’s little cause for concern. They startle easily, can’t relax, and can’t concentrate. They find it hard to fall asleep or stay asleep. They may get headaches, muscle aches, or unexplained pains. Symptoms often get worse during times of stress.

People with panic disorder have sudden, repeated bouts of fear—called panic attacks—that last several minutes or more. During a panic attack, they may feel that they can’t breathe or that they’re having a heart attack. They may fear loss of control or feel a sense of unreality. Not everyone who has panic attacks will develop panic disorder. But if the attacks recur without warning, creating fear of having another attack at any time, then it’s likely panic disorder.

Anxiety disorders tend to run in families. But researchers aren’t certain why some family members develop these conditions while others don’t. No specific genes have been found to actually cause an anxiety disorder. “Many different factors—including genes, stress, and the environment—have small effects that add up in complex ways to affect a person’s risk for these disorders,” Pine says.

“Many kids with anxiety disorders will outgrow their conditions. But most anxiety problems we see in adults started during their childhood,” Pine adds.

“Anxiety disorders are among the most common psychiatric disorders in children, with an estimated 1 in 3 suffering anxiety at some point during childhood or adolescence,” says Dr. Susan Whitfield-Gabrieli, a brain imaging expert at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. “About half of diagnosable mental health disorders start by age 14, so there’s a lot of interest in uncovering the factors that might influence the brain by those early teen years.”

Whitfield-Gabrieli is launching an NIH-funded study to create detailed MRI images of the brains of more than 200 teens, ages 14-15, with and without anxiety or depression. The scientists will then assess what brain structures and activities might be linked to these conditions. The study is part of NIH’s Human Connectome Project, in which research teams across the country are studying the complex brain connections that affect health and disease.

Whitfield-Gabrieli and colleagues have shown that analysis of brain connections might help predict which adults with social phobia will likely respond to cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). CBT is a type of talk therapy known to be effective for people with anxiety disorders. It helps them change their thinking patterns and how they react to anxiety-provoking situations. But it doesn’t work for everyone.

Of 38 adults with social phobia, those who responded best after 3 months of CBT had similar patterns of brain connections. This brain analysis led to major improvement, compared to a clinician’s assessment alone, in predicting treatment response. Larger studies will be needed to confirm the benefits of the approach.

“Ultimately, we hope that brain imaging will help us predict clinical outcomes and actually tailor the treatment to each individual—to know whether they’ll respond best to psychotherapy or to certain medications,” Whitfield-Gabrieli says.

Other researchers are focusing on our emotions and our ability to adjust them. “We want to understand not only how emotions can help us but also how they can create difficulties if they’re of the wrong intensity or the wrong type for a particular situation,” says Dr. James Gross, a clinical psychologist at Stanford University.

We all use different strategies to adjust our emotions, often without thinking about it. If something makes you angry, you may try to tamp down your emotion to avoid making a scene. If something annoys you, you might try to ignore it, modify it, or entirely avoid it.

But these strategies can turn harmful over time. For instance, people with social phobia might decide to avoid attending a professional conference so they can keep their anxiety in check. That makes them lose opportunities at work and miss chances to meet people and make friends.

Gross and others are examining the differences between how people with and without anxiety disorders regulate their emotions. “We’re finding that CBT is helpful in part because it teaches people to more effectively use emotion regulation strategies,” Gross says. “They then become more competent in their ability to use these strategies in their everyday lives.”

“It’s important to be aware that many different kinds of treatments are available, and people with anxiety disorders tend to have very good responses to those treatments,” Pine adds. The best way to start is often by talking with your physician. If you’re a parent, talk with your child’s pediatrician. “These health professionals are generally prepared to help identify such problems and help patients get the appropriate care they need,” Pine says.
Anxiety at a Glance
Anxiety is a feeling of worry, nervousness, or fear about an event or situation. It’s normal for people to feel anxious in response to stress. Sometimes, however, anxiety becomes a severe, persistent problem that’s hard to control and affects day-to-day life; if you have this type of problem, you may have an anxiety disorder. About 19 percent of U.S. adults have an anxiety disorder in any given year, and an estimated 31 percent have an anxiety disorder at some time in their lives. Anxiety disorders are generally treated with psychotherapy, medication, or both. If you think you may have an anxiety disorder, talk with your health care provider.

Researchers are examining ways in which complementary and integrative approaches might reduce anxiety or help people cope with it. Some studies have focused on the anxiety that people experience in everyday life or during stressful situations, while others have focused on anxiety disorders.

What the Science Says
Complementary approaches can be classified by their primary therapeutic input (how the therapy is taken in or delivered), which may be:

Nutritional (e.g., special diets, dietary supplements, herbs, probiotics, and microbial-based therapies).
Psychological (e.g., meditation, hypnosis, music therapies, relaxation therapies).
Physical (e.g., acupuncture, massage, spinal manipulation).
Combinations such as psychological and physical (e.g., yoga, tai chi, dance therapies, some forms of art therapy) or psychological and nutritional (e.g., mindful eating).
Nutritional approaches include what the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) previously categorized as natural products, whereas psychological and/or physical approaches include what was referred to as mind and body practices.

Some complementary health approaches may help to relieve anxiety during stressful situations, such as medical procedures. Less is known about whether complementary health approaches can help to manage anxiety disorders.

Psychological and Physical Approaches
Relaxation techniques may reduce anxiety in people with chronic medical problems and those who are having medical procedures. However, cognitive behavioral therapy (a type of psychotherapy) may be more helpful than relaxation techniques in treating at least some types of anxiety disorders.
Although some studies suggest that acupuncture might reduce anxiety, the research is too limited to allow definite conclusions to be reached.
Hypnosis has been studied for anxiety related to medical or dental procedures. Some studies have had promising results, but the overall evidence is not conclusive.
In some studies in people with cancer or other medical conditions, massage therapy helped to reduce anxiety; however, other studies did not find a beneficial effect. Little research has been done on massage for anxiety disorders, and the studies that have been done have had conflicting results.
Studies have looked at the effects of interventions involving mindfulness meditation on anxiety in various groups of people, including cancer patients, people with other chronic diseases, family caregivers, pregnant women, health care providers, employees, and students. Many but not all of these studies indicated that mindfulness was helpful for anxiety. There’s some evidence that Transcendental Meditation may have a beneficial effect on anxiety. There hasn’t been enough research to know whether mindfulness or other types of meditation are helpful for anxiety disorders.
There is evidence that listening to music can reduce anxiety during illness or medical treatment.
Studies suggest that meditative movement therapies (tai chi, qi gong, or yoga) might reduce anxiety, but the research is too limited to allow definite conclusions to be reached.
Reiki and therapeutic touch have not been shown to be helpful for anxiety.
Nutritional Approaches
Two studies, both supported by NCCIH, suggest that a chamomile extract might be helpful in managing generalized anxiety disorder, but the studies are preliminary, and their findings are not conclusive.
Kava may have a beneficial effect on anxiety. However, the use of kava supplements has been linked to a risk of severe liver damage.
Melatonin has been studied as a possible alternative to conventional anxiety-reducing drugs for patients who are about to have surgery, and the results have been promising.
There isn’t enough evidence on passionflower or valerian for anxiety to allow any conclusions to be reached.
Other Complementary Approaches
Aromatherapy and homeopathy haven’t been shown to be helpful for anxiety.
Side Effects and Risks
Psychological and/or physical approaches are generally safe for healthy people if properly performed by a qualified practitioner or taught by a well-trained instructor. As with any physical activity, practices that involve movement, such as yoga, pose some risk of injury. People with health conditions and pregnant women should talk with their health care providers about any complementary health approaches  they are considering and may need to modify or avoid some of them.
Dietary supplements may have side effects and interact with medications.
How psychologists help with anxiety disorders
Anxiety disorders can severely impair a person’s ability to function at work, school, and in social situations and can interfere with a person’s relationships.

Last updated: November 30, 2023 Date created: October 1, 2016
4 min read
Anxiety
44
Beyond worry
Everyone worries or feels nervous from time to time. Anxiety is a normal human reaction to stressful situations. But for people with anxiety disorders, those fears and worries aren’t temporary. Their anxiety persists, and can even get worse over time.

Anxiety disorders can severely impair a person’s ability to function at work, school, and in social situations. Anxiety can also interfere with a person’s relationships with family members and friends. Fortunately, though, there are effective treatments for anxiety.

In some cases, medications have a role in treating anxiety disorders. Yet research shows behavioral treatment, alone or in combination with medication, is a highly effective treatment for most people with an anxiety disorder.

Understanding anxiety
There are several major types of anxiety disorders:

Generalized anxiety disorder is characterized by persistent worry or anxious feelings. People with this disorder worry about a number of concerns, such as health problems or finances, and may have a general sense that something bad is going to happen. Symptoms include restlessness, irritability, muscle tension, difficulty concentrating, sleep problems, and generally feeling on edge.Panic disorder is marked by recurrent panic attacks that include symptoms such as sweating, trembling, shortness of breath, or a feeling of choking; a pounding heart or rapid heart rate; and feelings of dread. Such attacks often happen suddenly, without warning. People who experience panic attacks often become fearful about when the next episode will occur, which can cause them to change or restrict their normal activities.Phobias are intense fears about certain objects (spiders or snakes, for instance) or situations (such as flying in airplanes) that are distressing or intrusive.Social anxiety disorder is also known as social phobia. People with this disorder are fearful of social situations in which they might feel embarrassed or judged. They typically feel nervous spending time in social settings, feel self-conscious in front of others, and worry about being rejected by or offending others. Other common symptoms include having a hard time making friends, avoiding social situations, worrying for days before a social event, and feeling shaky, sweaty, or nauseous when spending time in a social setting.Obsessive-compulsive disorder is characterized by persistent, uncontrollable feelings and thoughts (obsessions) and routines or rituals (compulsions). Some common examples include compulsive hand washing in response to a fear of germs, or repeatedly checking work for errors.Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) can develop after a severe physical or emotional trauma such as a natural disaster, serious accident, or crime. Symptoms include flashbacks of the trauma, nightmares, and frightening thoughts that interfere with a person’s everyday routine for months or years after the traumatic experience.
Seeing a psychologist about anxiety disorders
Though many types of anxiety disorders exist, research suggests that most are driven by similar underlying processes. People with anxiety disorders tend to become easily overwhelmed by their emotions, and they tend to have particularly negative reactions to those unpleasant feelings and situations.

Often, people try to cope with those negative reactions by avoiding situations or experiences that make them anxious. Unfortunately, avoidance can backfire and actually feed the anxiety.

Psychologists are trained in diagnosing anxiety disorders and teaching patients healthier, more effective ways to cope. A form of psychotherapy known as cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is highly effective at treating anxiety disorders. Through CBT, psychologists help patients learn to identify and manage the factors that contribute to their anxiety.

Through the cognitive component of therapy, patients learn to understand how their thoughts contribute to their anxiety symptoms. By learning to change those thought patterns, they can reduce the likelihood and intensity of anxiety symptoms.

With the behavioral component, patients learn techniques to reduce undesired behaviors associated with anxiety disorders. Specifically, patients are encouraged to approach activities and situations that provoke anxiety (such as public speaking or being in an enclosed space) to learn that their feared outcomes (such as losing their train of thought or having a panic attack) are unlikely.

Psychotherapy for anxiety disorders: What to expect
Psychotherapy is a collaborative process, where psychologists and patients work together to identify specific concerns and develop concrete skills and techniques for coping with anxiety. Patients can expect to practice their new skills outside of sessions to manage anxiety in situations that might make them uncomfortable. However, psychologists won’t push patients into such scenarios until they’re sure they have the skills they need to effectively confront their fears.

Psychologists sometimes use other approaches to treat anxiety disorders in addition to CBT. Group psychotherapy, which typically involves several people who all have anxiety disorders, can be effective for both treating anxiety and providing patients with support.

Family psychotherapy can help family members understand their loved one’s anxiety and help them learn ways to interact that do not reinforce anxious habits. Family therapy can be particularly helpful for children and adolescents suffering from anxiety disorders.

Anxiety disorders are very treatable. Most patients who suffer from anxiety are able to reduce or eliminate symptoms after several (or fewer) months of psychotherapy, and many patients notice improvement after just a few sessions.

Psychologists are highly trained and will tailor a treatment plan to address the unique needs of each patient. To find a licensed psychologist in your area, visit Psychologist Locator.
Herbal treatment for anxiety: Is it effective?
Is there an effective herbal treatment for anxiety?
Answer From Brent A. Bauer, M.D.
Several herbal remedies have been studied as a treatment for anxiety, but more research is needed to understand the risks and benefits. Here's what we know — and don't know:

Kava. Kava appeared to be a promising treatment for anxiety, but reports of serious liver damage — even with short-term use — caused the Food and Drug Administration to issue warnings about the use of dietary supplements containing kava. While these initial reports of liver toxicity have been questioned, use extra caution and involve your doctor in the decision if you're considering using products containing kava.
Passion flower. A few small clinical trials suggest that passion flower might help with anxiety. In many commercial products, passion flower is combined with other herbs, making it difficult to distinguish the unique qualities of each herb. Passion flower is generally considered safe when taken as directed, but some studies found it can cause drowsiness, dizziness and confusion.
Valerian. In some studies, people who used valerian reported less anxiety and stress. In other studies, people reported no benefit. Valerian is generally considered safe at recommended doses, but since long-term safety trials are lacking, don't take it for more than a few weeks at a time, unless your doctor approves. It can cause some side effects such as headaches, dizziness and drowsiness.
Chamomile. Limited data shows that short-term use of chamomile is generally considered safe and can be effective in reducing symptoms of anxiety. But chamomile can increase the risk of bleeding when used with blood-thinning drugs. Use of chamomile can cause allergic reactions in some people who are sensitive to the family of plants that includes chamomile. Other members of this family are ragweed, marigolds, daisies and chrysanthemums.
Lavender. Some evidence suggests that oral lavender or aromatherapy with lavender can reduce anxiety; however, evidence is preliminary and limited. Oral lavender can cause constipation and headaches. It can also increase appetite, increase the sedative effect of other medications and supplements, and cause low blood pressure.
Lemon balm. Preliminary research shows lemon balm can reduce some symptoms of anxiety, such as nervousness and excitability. Lemon balm is generally well-tolerated and considered safe for short-term use, but can cause nausea and abdominal pain.
Herbal supplements aren't monitored by the FDA the same way medications are. Despite enhanced quality control regulations in place since 2010, the quality of some supplements may still be an issue. Remember, natural doesn't always mean safe.

If you're considering taking any herbal supplement as a treatment for anxiety, talk to your doctor first, especially if you take other medications. The interaction of some herbal supplements and certain medications can cause serious side effects.

Some herbal supplements taken for anxiety can cause you to feel sleepy, so they may not be safe to take when driving or doing dangerous tasks. Your doctor can help you understand possible risks and benefits if you choose to try an herbal supplement.

If your anxiety is interfering with daily activities, talk with your doctor. More-serious forms of anxiety generally need medical treatment or psychological counseling (psychotherapy) for symptoms to improve.
Is it true that certain foods worsen anxiety and others have a calming effect?
Answer From Craig N. Sawchuk, Ph.D., L.P.
Anxiety symptoms can make you feel unwell. Coping with anxiety can be a challenge and often requires making lifestyle changes. There aren't any diet changes that can cure anxiety, but watching what you eat may help.

Try these steps:

Eat a breakfast that includes some protein. Eating protein at breakfast can help you feel fuller longer and help keep your blood sugar steady so that you have more energy as you start your day.
Eat complex carbohydrates. Carbohydrates are thought to increase the amount of serotonin in your brain, which has a calming effect. Eat foods rich in complex carbohydrates, such as whole grains — for example, oatmeal, quinoa, whole-grain breads and whole-grain cereals. Steer clear of foods that contain simple carbohydrates, such as sugary foods and drinks.
Drink plenty of water. Even mild dehydration can affect your mood.
Limit or avoid alcohol. The immediate effect of alcohol may be calming. But as alcohol is processed by your body, it can make you edgy. Alcohol can also interfere with sleep.
Limit or avoid caffeine. Avoid caffeinated beverages. They can make you feel jittery and nervous and can interfere with sleep.
Pay attention to food sensitivities. In some people, certain foods or food additives can cause unpleasant physical reactions. In certain people, these physical reactions may lead to shifts in mood, including irritability or anxiety.
Try to eat healthy, balanced meals. Healthy eating is important for overall physical and mental health. Eat lots of fresh fruits and vegetables, and don't overeat. It may also help to eat fish high in omega-3 fatty acids, such as salmon, on a regular basis.
Changes to your diet may make some difference to your general mood or sense of well-being, but they're not a substitute for treatment. Lifestyle changes, such as improving sleep habits, increasing social support, using stress-reduction techniques and getting regular exercise, also may help. Be patient, as it may take some time before these changes have an effect on your anxiety.

If your anxiety is severe or interferes with your day-to-day activities or enjoyment of life, you may need counseling (psychotherapy), medication or other treatment.

Depression and anxiety symptoms often improve with exercise. Here are some realistic tips to help you get started and stay motivated.

By Mayo Clinic Staff
When you have depression or anxiety, exercise often seems like the last thing you want to do. But once you get started and keep going, exercise can make a big difference.

Exercise helps prevent and improve many health problems, including high blood pressure, diabetes and arthritis. Research on depression, anxiety and exercise shows that the mental health and physical benefits of exercise also can help mood get better and lessen anxiety.

The links between depression, anxiety and exercise aren't entirely clear. But working out and other forms of physical activity can ease symptoms of depression or anxiety and make you feel better. Exercise also may help keep depression and anxiety from coming back once you're feeling better.

Regular exercise may help ease depression and anxiety by:

Releasing feel-good endorphins. Endorphins are natural brain chemicals that can improve your sense of well-being.
Taking your mind off worries. Thinking about something else instead of worrying can get you away from the cycle of negative thoughts that feed depression and anxiety.
Regular exercise has many mental health and emotional benefits too. It can help you:

Gain confidence. Meeting exercise goals or challenges, even small ones, can boost your self-confidence. Getting in shape also can make you feel better about how you look.
Get more social interaction. Exercise and physical activity may give you the chance to meet or socialize with others. Just sharing a friendly smile or greeting as you walk around your neighborhood can help your mood.
Cope in a healthy way. Doing something positive to manage depression or anxiety is a healthy coping strategy. Trying to feel better by drinking alcohol, dwelling on how you feel, or hoping depression or anxiety will go away on its own can lead to worsening symptoms.
Some research shows that physical activity such as regular walking — not just formal exercise programs — may help mood improve. Physical activity and exercise are not the same thing, but both are good for your health.

Physical activity is any activity that works your muscles and requires energy. Physical activity can include work or household or leisure activities.
Exercise is a planned, structured and repetitive body movement. Exercise can help people get physically fit or to stay fit.
The word "exercise" may make you think of running laps around the gym. But exercise includes a wide range of activities that boost your activity level to help you feel better.

Certainly running, lifting weights, playing basketball and other fitness activities that get your heart pumping can help. But so can physical activity such as gardening, washing your car, walking around the block or doing other less intense activities. Any physical activity that gets you off the couch and moving can boost your mood.

You don't have to do all your exercise or other physical activity at one time. Broaden how you think of exercise. Find ways to add small amounts of physical activity throughout your day. For example, take the stairs instead of the elevator. Park a little farther away from work to fit in a short walk. Or if you live close to your job, consider biking to work.

For most healthy adults, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services exercise guidelines recommend at least 150 minutes of moderate aerobic activity a week. Or get at least 75 minutes of vigorous aerobic activity a week. You also can get an equal mix of the two types.

Aim to exercise most days of the week. But even small amounts of physical activity can be helpful. Being active for short periods of time, such as 10 to 15 minutes at a time, throughout the day can add up and have health benefits.

Regular exercise may improve depression or anxiety symptoms enough to make a big difference. That big difference can help kick-start further improvements. The mental health benefits of exercise and physical activity may last only if you stick with them over the long term. That's another good reason to find activities that you enjoy.

Starting and sticking with an exercise routine or regular physical activity can be a challenge. These steps can help:

Find what you enjoy doing. Figure out what type of physical activities you're most likely to do. Then think about when and how you'd be most likely to follow through. For example, would you be more likely to do some gardening in the evening, start your day with a jog, or go for a bike ride or play basketball with your children after school? Doing what you enjoy can help you stick with it.
Get your healthcare professional's support. Talk to your healthcare professional or mental health professional for suggestions and support. Talk about an exercise program or physical activity routine and how it fits into your overall treatment plan.
Set reasonable goals. Your mission doesn't have to be walking for an hour five days a week. Think realistically about what you may be able to do. Then begin slowly and build up over time. Make your plan fit your own needs and abilities rather than setting goals that you're not likely to meet.
Don't think of exercise or physical activity as a chore. If exercise is just another "should" in your life that you don't think you're living up to, you'll think of it as a failure. Instead, look at your exercise or physical activity schedule the same way you look at your therapy sessions or medicine — as one of the tools to help you get better.
Think about what keeps you from being successful. Figure out what's stopping you from being physically active or exercising. If you think about what's stopping you, you can probably find a solution. For example, if you feel self-conscious, you may want to exercise at home. If you stick to goals better with a partner, find a friend to work out with or who enjoys the same physical activities that you do. If you don't have money to spend on exercise gear, do something that's cost-free, such as regular walking.
Prepare for setbacks and obstacles. Give yourself credit for every step in the right direction, no matter how small. If you skip exercise one day, that doesn't mean you can't keep up an exercise routine and might as well quit. Just try again the next day. Stick with it.
Check with your doctor or other healthcare professional before starting a new exercise program to make sure it's safe for you. Talk about which activities, how much exercise and what intensity level is OK for you. Your healthcare professional can consider any medicines you take and your health conditions. You also can get helpful advice about getting started and staying on track.

If you exercise regularly but depression or anxiety symptoms still affect your daily living, see your healthcare professional or mental health professional. Exercise and physical activity are great ways to ease symptoms of depression or anxiety, but they don't replace talk therapy, sometimes called psychotherapy, or medicines.
How to Cope with Medical Test Anxiety
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook Twitter Pinterest
What is medical test anxiety?
Medical test anxiety is a fear of medical tests. Medical tests are procedures that are used to diagnose, screen for, or monitor various diseases and conditions. While many people sometimes feel nervous or uncomfortable about testing, it doesn't usually cause serious problems or symptoms.

Medical test anxiety can be serious. It can become a type of phobia. A phobia is an anxiety disorder that causes an intense, irrational fear of something that poses little or no actual danger. Phobias can also cause physical symptoms such as rapid heartbeat, shortness of breath, and trembling.

What are the different types of medical tests?
The most common types of medical tests are:

Tests of body fluids. Your body fluids include blood, urine, sweat, and saliva. Testing involves getting a sample of the fluid.
Imaging tests. These tests look at the inside of your body. Imaging tests include x-rays, ultrasound, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Another type of imaging test is endoscopy. Endoscopy uses a thin, lighted tube with a camera that is inserted into the body. It provides images of internal organs and other systems.
Biopsy. This is a test that takes a small sample of tissue for testing. It is used to check for cancer and certain other conditions.
Measurement of body functions. These tests check the activity of different organs. Testing may include checking the electrical activity of the heart or brain or measuring the function of the lungs.
Genetic testing. These tests check cells from the skin, bone marrow, or other areas. They are most often used to diagnose genetic diseases or find out if you are at risk for getting a genetic disorder.
These procedures can provide important information about your health. Most tests have little or no risk. But people with medical test anxiety may be so afraid of testing that they avoid them altogether. And this can actually put their health at risk.

What are the types of medical test anxiety?
The most common types of medical anxieties (phobias) are:

Trypanophobia, the fear of needles. Many people have some fear of needles, but people with trypanophobia have an excessive fear of injections or needles. This fear may stop them from getting needed tests or treatment. It can be especially dangerous to people with chronic medical conditions that need frequent testing or treatment.
Iatrophobia, the fear of doctors and medical tests. People with iatrophobia may avoid seeing health care providers for routine care or when they have symptoms of illness. But some minor illnesses can turn serious or even deadly if left untreated.
Claustrophobia, the fear of enclosed spaces. Claustrophobia can affect people in many different ways. You may experience claustrophobia if you are getting an MRI. During an MRI, you are placed inside an enclosed, tube-shaped scanning machine. The space in the scanner is narrow and small.
How do I cope with medical test anxiety?
Fortunately, there are some relaxation techniques that may reduce your medical test anxiety, including:

Deep breathing. Take three slow breaths. Count to three for each one, then repeat. Slow down if you start to feel lightheaded.
Counting. Count to 10, slowly and silently.
Imagery. Close your eyes and picture an image or a place that makes you feel happy.
Muscle relaxation. Concentrate on making your muscles feel relaxed and loose.
Talking. Chat with someone in the room. It may help distract you.
If you have trypanophobia, iatrophobia, or claustrophobia, the following tips may help reduce your specific type of anxiety.

For trypanophobia, fear of needles:

If you don't have to limit or avoid fluids beforehand, drink lots of water the day before and morning of a blood test. This puts more fluid in your veins and may make it easier to draw blood.
Ask your provider if you can get a topical anesthetic to numb the skin.
If the sight of a needle bothers you, close your eyes or turn away during the test.
If you have diabetes and need to get regular insulin injections, you might be able to use a needle-free alternative, such as a jet injector. A jet injector delivers insulin using a high-pressure jet of mist, instead of a needle.
For iatrophobia, the fear of doctors and medical tests:

Bring a friend or family member to your appointment for support.
Bring a book, magazine, or something else to distract you while you wait for your appointment.
For moderate or severe iatrophobia, you may want to consider seeking help from a mental health professional.
If you feel comfortable talking with your provider, ask about medicines that could help reduce your anxiety.
To avoid claustrophobia during an MRI:

Ask your health care provider for a mild sedative prior to the exam.
Ask your provider if you can get tested in an open MRI scanner instead of a traditional MRI. Open MRI scanners are larger and have an open side. It may make you feel less claustrophobic. The images produced may not be as good as those done in a traditional MRI, but it still may be helpful in making a diagnosis.
Avoiding medical tests can be harmful to your health. If you suffer from any type of medical anxiety, you should talk with your health care provider or a mental health professional.
Always talk to a health care provider before stopping a medication. If someone has a
bad reaction or thinks their medication is not working, they should tell their provider.
A health care provider can advise about when it is safe to stop taking a medication.
When should a medication be stopped?
There are many reasons someone may want to stop taking medications.1-2 When
people feel better, they may want to stop. They also may want to stop their medication
because of side effects, not seeing any benefit, or concerns about cost. No matter the
reason, always let a health care provider know.
Talking to a health care provider is important because they can talk about concerns
related to medications. They may be able to inform on ways to lessen a side effect that
would allow a person to keep taking their medication. Often, they can provide
education on how medications help. If high cost is an issue, there may be a generic
medication, a different dosage form, or a patient assistance program that a health care
provider can recommend. Communication is key!
Sometimes long-term use of medications may not be necessary. The duration of
medication treatment depends on many factors. Some medications need to be
continued even when someone is not having symptoms to make sure the symptoms
do not return. If someone does not have any symptoms, that may be a sign the
medication is working. A health care provider can help decide when it is the right time
to stop a medication, if a dose change is needed, or if the medication should be
switched.
How should a medication be stopped?
When stopping a medication, it is important to work with a health care provider. Many
times, slowly lowering the dose of the medication is best. This allows the body time to
adjust to the change. Sometimes decreasing over a few days is all that is needed. For
other medication, a longer time is needed. How fast the dose can be lowered depends
on several factors. These factors include how long someone has taken the medication,
the dose, and the reason for stopping the medicine.
Sometimes stopping a medication suddenly can have bad effects. It may worsen the
problem it was treating. For some medications, it can cause a more serious problem.
For example, benzodiazepines are medications that often must be slowly decreased.
These are medications such as alprazolam, diazepam, or clonazepam, among others. If
these medications are stopped too quickly, seizures may occur.3 Other uncomfortable
effects such as tremors, palpitations (irregular heartbeat), or sweating may also occur.
Sometimes another medication may be given to help lower risks while stopping a
medication. A pharmacist can help decide if another medication should be used. 
What Are Anxiety Disorders?
Anxiety disorders cause extreme fear and worry, and changes in a child's behavior, sleep, eating, or mood.

What Are the Kinds of Anxiety Disorders?
Different anxiety disorders can affect kids and teens. They include:

generalized anxiety disorder
separation anxiety disorder
social anxiety disorder
panic disorder
selective mutism
specific phobias
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). GAD causes kids to worry almost every day — and over lots of things. Kids with GAD worry over things that most kids worry about, like homework, tests, or making mistakes.

But with GAD, kids worry more, and more often, about these things. Kids with GAD also worry over things parents might not expect would cause worry. For example, they might worry about recess, lunchtime, birthday parties, playtime with friends, or riding the school bus. Kids with GAD may also worry about war, weather, or the future. Or about loved ones, safety, illness, or getting hurt.

Having GAD can make it hard for kids to focus in school. Because with GAD, there is almost always a worry on a kid's mind. GAD makes it hard for kids to relax and have fun, eat well, or fall asleep at night. They may miss many days of school because worry makes them feel sick, afraid, or tired.

Some kids with GAD keep worries to themselves. Others talk about their worries with a parent or teacher. They might ask over and over whether something they worry about will happen. But it's hard for them to feel OK, no matter what a parent says.  

Separation anxiety disorder. It's normal for babies and very young kids to feel anxious the first times they are apart from their parent. But soon they get used to being with a grandparent, babysitter, or teacher. And they start to feel at home at daycare or school.

But when kids don't outgrow the fear of being apart from a parent, it's called separation anxiety disorder. Even as they get older, kids with separation anxiety disorder feel very anxious about being away from their parent or away from home. They may miss many days of school. They may say they feel too sick or upset to go. They may cling to a parent, cry, or refuse to go to school, sleepovers, playdates, or other activities without their parent. At home, they may have trouble falling asleep or sleeping alone. They may avoid being in a room at home if their parent isn't close by.

Social phobia (social anxiety disorder). With social phobia, kids to feel too afraid of what others will think or say. They are always afraid they might do or say something embarrassing. They worry they might sound or look weird. They don't like to be the center of attention. They don't want others to notice them, so they might avoid raising their hand in class. If they get called on in class, they may freeze or panic and can't answer. With social phobia, a class presentation or a group activity with classmates can cause extreme fear.

Social phobia can cause kids and teens to avoid school or friends. They may feel sick or tired before or during school. They may complain of other body sensations that go with anxiety too. For example, they may feel their heart racing or feel short of breath. They may feel jumpy and feel they can't sit still. They may feel their face get hot or blush. They may feel shaky or lightheaded.

Panic disorder. These sudden anxiety attacks can cause overwhelming physicals symptoms, such as feeling shaky or jittery, trembling, a racing heart rate, and shortness of breath. Panic attacks can happen any time. They’re more common in teens than kids.

Selective mutism. This extreme form of social phobia causes kids to be so afraid they don't talk. Kids and teens who have it can talk. And they do talk at home or with their closest people. But they refuse to talk at all at school, with friends, or in other places where they have this fear.

Specific phobias. It's normal for young kids to feel scared of the dark, monsters, big animals, or loud noises like thunder or fireworks. Most of the time, when kids feel afraid, adults can help them feel safe and calm again. But a phobia is a more intense, more extreme, and longer lasting fear of a specific thing. With a phobia, a child dreads the thing they fear and tries to avoid it. If they are near what they fear, they feel terrified and are hard to comfort.

With a specific phobia, kids may have an extreme fear of things like animals, spiders, needles or shots, blood, throwing up, thunderstorms, people in costumes, or the dark. A phobia causes kids to avoid going places where they think they might see the thing they fear. For example, a kid with a phobia of dogs may not go to a friend's house, to a park, or to a party because dogs might be there.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of Anxiety?
A parent or teacher may see signs that a child or teen is anxious. For example, a kid might cling, miss school, or cry. They might act scared or upset, or refuse to talk or do things. Kids and teens with anxiety also feel symptoms that others can't see. It can make them feel afraid, worried, or nervous.

It can affect their body too. They might feel shaky, jittery, or short of breath. They may feel "butterflies" in their stomach, a hot face, clammy hands, dry mouth, or a racing heart.

These symptoms of anxiety are the result of the "fight or flight" response. This is the body's normal response to danger. It triggers the release of natural chemicals in the body. These chemicals prepare us to deal with a real danger. They affect heart rate, breathing, muscles, nerves, and digestion. This response is meant to protect us from danger. But with anxiety disorders, the "fight or flight" response is overactive. It happens even when there is no real danger.

What Causes Anxiety Disorders?
Several things play a role in causing the overactive "fight or flight" that happens with anxiety disorders. They include:

Genetics. A child who has a family member with an anxiety disorder is more likely to have one too. Kids may inherit genes that make them prone to anxiety.

Brain chemistry. Genes help direct the way brain chemicals (called neurotransmitters) work. If specific brain chemicals are in short supply, or not working well, it can cause anxiety.

Life situations. Things that happen in a child's life can be stressful and difficult to cope with. Loss, serious illness, death of a loved one, violence, or abuse can lead some kids to become anxious.

Learned behaviors. Growing up in a family where others are fearful or anxious also can "teach" a child to be afraid too.

How Are Anxiety Disorders Diagnosed?
Anxiety disorders can be diagnosed by a trained therapist. They talk with you and your child, ask questions, and listen carefully. They'll ask how and when the child's anxiety and fears happen most. That helps them diagnose the specific anxiety disorder the child has.

A child or teen with symptoms of anxiety should also have a regular health checkup. This helps make sure no other health problem is causing the symptoms.

How Are Anxiety Disorders Treated?
Most often, anxiety disorders are treated with cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). This is a type of talk therapy that helps families, kids, and teens learn to manage worry, fear, and anxiety.

CBT teaches kids that what they think and do affects how they feel. In CBT, kids learn that when they avoid what they fear, the fear stays strong. They learn that when they face a fear, the fear gets weak and goes away.

In CBT:

Parents learn how to best respond when a child is anxious. They learn how to help kids face fears.
Kids learn coping skills so they can face fear and worry less.
The therapist helps kids practice, and gives support and praise as they try. Over time, kids learn to face fears and feel better. They learn to get used to situations they're afraid of. They feel proud of what they've learned. And without so many worries, they can focus on other things — like school, activities, and fun. Sometimes, medicines are also used to help treat anxiety.

How Can I Help My Child?
If your child has an anxiety disorder, here are some ways you can help: 

Find a trained therapist and take your child to all the therapy appointments.
Talk often with the therapist, and ask how you can best help your child.
Help your child face fears. Ask the therapist how you can help your child practice at home. Praise your child for efforts to cope with fears and worry.
Help kids talk about feelings. Listen, and let them know you understand, love, and accept them. A caring relationship with you helps your child build inner strengths.
Encourage your child to take small steps forward. Don't let your child give up or avoid what they're afraid of. Help them take small positive steps forward.
Be patient. It takes a while for therapy to work and for kids to feel better.
As kids grow, they face many new things. Starting school. Meeting new friends. Learning to swim. Competing in sports. Learning to drive. Each new thing can feel like a big step forward.

When kids and teens face new things, they often feel a mix of emotions. Facing something new — even when it's a good thing — can be stressful. It's natural to feel excited about what's ahead — and to worry about whether they're ready to handle it.

Worry isn't all bad. It can be helpful as long as it doesn't last too long, become too intense, or happen too often.

Worry is a caution signal. It's a natural response to a big event, change, or challenge. Worry is a way of thinking and feeling ahead: "Am I ready for this? What's going to happen? Is it safe to go ahead? What do I need to do to get ready? How will I do it? What if I feel nervous?"
Thinking through the part they worry about — calmly and with support from parents — can help kids get ready for what's ahead. When kids feel prepared, they can focus on the part they're looking forward to.   

How Adults Can Help
Sometimes kids avoid things that feel new or challenging. But doing new things (that are safe and right for their age) helps kids grow. With each new challenge they can gain skills and confidence.

Parents can help kids and teens face new things without letting worry hold them back. Here’s how:

Spend time with them. Do this every day, even if it's just a few minutes. Do things together that you both enjoy. Go for a walk, cook, eat, play — or just hang out. Find ways to smile and laugh together. This keeps the bond between you strong and positive. And it creates moments for kids to open up naturally.
Ask what's on their minds. Help kids label what they think and feel. They might not always have a lot to say. And they might not always want to talk about what's on their minds. But let kids know you're open to listening and talking any time.
Listen with patience. When kids and teens want to talk, listen with your full attention. Give them time to put their thoughts and feelings into words. Ask questions to hear more. Don't be too quick to give advice. Let them confide. Listen calmly to what they have to say.
Validate. Let kids know you understand. Say it’s okay to feel how they feel. Tell them their feelings are normal. Try not to say, "There's nothing to worry about." This can make kids think they shouldn't feel the way they do. Instead, listen calmly and accept how they feel. That makes it easier for kids to share.
Help kids think of how to handle things. Help them feel capable. Don't jump in to solve things for them. Instead, invite kids and teens to think of what they can do. Support their good ideas. Talk it through together. Remind them of times they tried something new and it went well. Offer to help as needed.
Help them practice. When possible, help kids break a new thing into small steps. Let them practice one step at a time as they build toward their goal. Celebrate each success.
Encourage. Praise your child's effort and progress. Tell them what they said or did that made you proud. Help them relax so that stress and worry don't build up.
Help them expect good things. Ask your child or teen to share what's going well and what they look forward to. Ask about the good things that happen in their day. Tell them about the good things in your day, too. Let them know that it’s OK to talk about worries but it helps to put more focus on the good moments.
Soothe and comfort. At times, kids and teens may feel overwhelmed by worry. In those moments, trying to talk it through isn't likely to help. It might help more to offer comfort and understanding. Remind them that you're there to help them through things that happen. Teach them to use calm breathing to relax their mind and body.
What if My Child Worries too Much?
Sometimes worries become worse with time. When kids worry too much, it’s hard to enjoy school, activities or friends. Worries can start to affect sleeping or eating. They can lead kids to feel anxious or afraid, and to avoid things they might enjoy. Worry like this could be a sign of an anxiety disorder.

If your child has worry, stress, or anxiety that seems too hard for them to handle, talk with your child's doctor or a mental health doctor. Childhood anxiety can get better with the right treatment and support.
Everyone feels anxious at times. Anxiety can surface when you face a challenge, when the pressure’s on to do well, or when you’ve got a worry on your mind.

Anxiety turns on your body’s stress response (also called fight or flight). This instant surge of stress hormones is a survival response. It prepares you to react quickly and protect yourself if you need to. If you’re scared or not sure you’re safe, anxiety prompts you to be cautious.

But many people feel anxious in situations that are stressful to them but aren't dangerous. For example, they may feel anxious about taking tests, meeting new people, or speaking in class.

If you feel anxious in situations like these, you’re not alone. But it’s best to learn how to cope. Otherwise, anxiety can hold you back or cause you to avoid things you’d like to do.

Instead of avoiding things that prompt anxiety, it’s better to face them. You might be surprised by what you can do. Here are five things that can help you through anxious moments:

Start with a ‘growth’ mindset. Some people have a fixed mindset. They might think, “This is how I am. I'm too anxious to speak in class. So I don’t raise my hand.” With a fixed mindset, people don’t think things can change. They think they are the way they are, period.

But brain science has shown that you can teach your brain new ways to respond. People with a growth mindset know this. They know they can get better at just about everything — with effort and practice. That includes reducing anxiety.
Notice how anxiety affects your body. When you’re anxious, do you feel "butterflies" in your stomach? Sweaty palms? Shaky hands? A faster heartbeat? Tight muscles?

These physical feelings are part of your body’s stress response. They can be uncomfortable but they aren't harmful. You can cope. Next time you feel them, try to notice them without getting upset that they’re there. You don’t have to push the feelings away. But you don’t have to give them all your attention either. See if you can let them be in the background.
Breathe. When you feel anxious, take a few slow breaths. Breathe in slowly. Be sure to breathe out all the way. You can use your fingers to count four or five breaths, in and out.

Taking slow breaths can slow the release of stress hormones. It can help your body and mind feel more at ease. As you guide your attention to your breath, you can pay less attention to anxious thoughts and feelings. Breathing like this can help you feel steady and less anxious.
Talk yourself through it. When you’re anxious, you might tell yourself things like, “I can’t do this!” or, "What if I mess this up?" or, "This is overwhelming." Instead, plan to tell yourself something that could help you face the moment with a bit of courage like, “I can do this!" or, “It’s OK to feel anxious. I can do this anyway.”
Face the situation — don’t wait for anxiety to go away. You might think that you’ll put off speaking in class or talking to that new person until you no longer feel anxious about it. But it doesn’t work that way. It’s facing the anxiety that helps you lower it.
Learning to cope with anxiety takes time, patience, and practice. Most of all it takes being willing to face situations that prompt anxiety. Start with one small step. The more you practice, the better you’ll get at lowering anxiety.

As you use these five steps, it can help to get some guidance and support from a parent, school counselor, or a therapist.

And if your anxiety feels extreme or hard to cope with, or if you're feeling anxious about a problem you need help with, tell a parent or another adult you trust. With the right care and support, you can feel less anxious and more confident.
Your Adolescent - Anxiety and Avoidant Disorders
Excerpts from Your Adolescent on Anxiety and Avoidant Disorders

Everyone experiences anxiety. It is a natural and important emotion, signaling through stirrings of worry, fearfulness, and alarm that danger or a sudden, threatening change is near. Yet sometimes anxiety becomes an exaggerated, unhealthy response.

Given the array of changes and uncertainties facing a normal teenager, anxiety often hums along like background noise. For some teenagers, anxiety becomes a chronic, highpitched state, interfering with their ability to attend school and to perform up to their academic potential. Participating in extracurricular activities, making and keeping friends, and maintaining a supportive, flexible relationship within the family become difficult. Sometimes anxiety is limited to generalized, free-floating feelings of uneasiness. At other times, it develops into panic attacks and phobias.

Identifying the Signs
Anxiety disorders vary from teenager to teenager. Symptoms generally include excessive fears and worries, feelings of inner restlessness, and a tendency to be excessively wary and vigilant. Even in the absence of an actual threat, some teenagers describe feelings of continual nervousness, restlessness, or extreme stress.

In a social setting, anxious teenagers may appear dependent, withdrawn, or uneasy. They seem either overly restrained or overly emotional. They may be preoccupied with worries about losing control or unrealistic concerns about social competence.

Teenagers who suffer from excessive anxiety regularly experience a range of physical symptoms as well. They may complain about muscle tension and cramps, stomachaches, headaches, pain in the limbs and back, fatigue, or discomforts associated with pubertal changes. They may blotch, flush, sweat, hyperventilate, tremble, and startle easily.

Anxiety during adolescence typically centers on changes in the way the adolescent's body looks and feels, social acceptance, and conflicts about independence. When flooded with anxiety, adolescents may appear extremely shy. They may avoid their usual activities or refuse to engage in new experiences. They may protest whenever they are apart from friends. Or in an attempt to diminish or deny their fears and worries, they may engage in risky behaviors, drug experimentation, or impulsive sexual behavior.

Panic Disorder More common in girls than boys, panic disorder emerges in adolescence usually between the ages of fifteen and nineteen. Feelings of intense panic may arise without any noticeable cause or they may be triggered by specific situations, in which case they are called panic attacks. A panic attack is an abrupt episode of severe anxiety with accompanying emotional and physical symptoms.

During a panic attack, the youngster may feel overwhelmed by an intense fear or discomfort, a sense of impending doom, the fear he's going crazy, or sensations of unreality. Accompanying the emotional symptoms may be shortness of breath, sweating, choking, chest pains, nausea, dizziness, and numbness or tingling in his extremities. During an attack, some teens may feel they're dying or can't think. Following a panic attack, many youngsters worry that they will have other attacks and try to avoid situations that they believe may trigger them. Because of this fearful anticipation, the teen may begin to avoid normal activities and routines.

Phobias Many fears of younger children are mild, passing, and considered within the range of normal development. Some teenagers develop exaggerated and usually inexplicable fears called phobias that center on specific objects or situations. These intense fears can limit a teenager's activities. The fear generated by a phobia is excessive and not a rational response to a situation. The objects of a phobia usually change as a child gets older. While very young children may be preoccupied with the dark, monsters, or actual dangers, adolescents' phobic fears tend to involve school and social performance.

Several studies have revealed an increase in school avoidance in middle-school or junior-high years. With school avoidance, excessive worries about performance or social pressures at school may be at the root of the reluctance to attend school regularly. This leads to a cycle of anxiety, physical complaints, and school avoidance. The cycle escalates with the worsening of physical complaints such as stomachaches, headaches, and menstrual cramps. Visits to the doctor generally fail to uncover general medical explanations. The longer a teenager stays out of school, the harder it becomes for him to overcome his fear and anxiety and return to school. He feels increasingly isolated from school activities and different from other kids.

Some youngsters are naturally more timid than others, As their bodies, voices, and emotions change during adolescence, they may feel even more self-conscious. Despite initial feelings of uncertainty, most teens are able to join in if given time to observe and warm up. In extreme cases, called social phobia, the adolescent becomes very withdrawn, and though he wants to take part in social activities, he's unable to overcome intense self-doubt and worry. Gripped by excessive or unreasonable anxiety when faced with entering a new or unfamiliar social situation, the adolescent with social phobia becomes captive to unrelenting fears of other people's judgment or expectations. He may deal with his social discomfort by fretting about his health, appearance, or overall competence. Alternatively, he may behave in a clowning or boisterous fashion or consume alcohol to deal with the anxiety.

Because so much of a teenager's social life gets played out in school, social phobia may overlap with and be hard to distinguish from school avoidance. Some teens with social phobia may try to sidestep their anxious feelings altogether by refusing to attend or participate in school, Classroom and academic performance falls off, involvement in social and extracurricular activities dwindles, and, as a consequence, self-esteem declines.

Some teens may experience such a high level of anxiety that they cannot leave the house. This disorder, agoraphobia, seems to stem from feelings about being away from parents and fears of being away from home rather than fear of the world. In fact, a number of children who demonstrate severe separation anxiety in early childhood go on to develop agoraphobia as adolescents and adults.

Causes and Consequences
Most researchers believe that a predisposition towards timidity and nervousness is inborn. If one parent is naturally anxious, there's a good chance that their child will also have anxious tendencies. At the same time, a parent's own uneasiness is often communicated to the child, compounding the child's natural sensitivity. A cycle of increasing uneasiness may then be established. By the time this child reaches adolescence, his characteristic way of experiencing and relating to his world is tinged with anxiety. Some research suggests that children who are easily agitated or upset never learned to soothe themselves earlier in life.

In many cases, adolescent anxiety disorders may have begun earlier as separation anxiety, the tendency to become flooded with fearfulness whenever separated from home or from those to whom the child is attached, usually a parent. Adolescents can also have separation disorders. These teens may deny anxiety about separation, yet it may be reflected in their reluctance to leave home and resistance to being drawn into independent activity. Separation anxiety is often behind a teen's refusal to attend or remain at school.

School avoidance can follow a significant change at school, such as the transition into middle school or junior high. It may also be triggered by something unrelated to school, such as a divorce, illness, or a death in the family. Some youngsters become fearful about gang activities or the lack of safety in school.

A worried teenager performs less well in school, sports, and social interactions. Too much worry can also result in a teenager's failing to achieve to his potential. A teen who experiences a great deal of anxiety may be overly conforming, perfectionistic, and unsure of himself. In attempting to gain approval or avoid disapproval, he may redo tasks or procrastinate. The anxious youngster often seeks excessive reassurance about his identity and whether be is good enough.

Some teenagers with anxiety disorders can also develop mood disorders or eating disorders. Some teenagers who experience persistent anxiety may also develop suicidal feelings or engage in self-destructive behaviors; these situations require immediate attention and treatment. Anxious teens may also use alcohol and drugs to self-medicate or self-sootheor develop rituals in an effort to reduce or prevent anxiety.

How to Respond
If your teenager is willing to talk about his fears and anxieties, listen carefully and respectfully. Without discounting his feelings, help him understand that increased feelings of uneasiness about his body, performance, and peer acceptance and a general uncertainty are all natural parts of adolescence.

By helping him trace his anxiety to specific situations and experiences, you may help him reduce the overwhelming nature of his feelings. Reassure him that, although his concerns are real, in all likelihood he will be able to handle them and that as he gets older, he will develop different techniques to be better able to deal with stress and anxiety.

Remind him of other times when he was initially afraid but still managed to enter into new situations, such as junior high school or camp. Praise him when he takes part in spite of his uneasiness. Point out that you are proud of his ability to act in the face of considerable anxiety. Remember, your teenager may not always be comfortable talking about feelings that he views as signs of weakness. While it may seem at the moment as though he's not listening, later he may be soothed by your attempts to help.

If fearfulness begins to take over your teenager's life and limit his activities, or if the anxiety lasts over six months, seek professional advice. His doctor or teacher will be able to recommend a child and adolescent psychiatrist or other professional specializing in treating adolescents.

Managing anxiety disorders - as with any adolescent emotional disturbance - usually requires a combination of treatment interventions. The most effective plan must be individualized to the teenager and his family. While these disorders can cause considerable distress and disruption to the teen's life, the overall prognosis is good.

Treatment for an anxiety disorder begins with an evaluation of symptoms, family and social context, and the extent of interference or impairment to the teen. Parents, as well as the teenager, should be included in this process. School records and personnel may be consulted to identify how the teen's performance and function in school has been affected by the disorder.

The evaluating clinician will also consider any underlying physical illnesses or diseases, such as diabetes, that could be causing the anxiety symptoms. Medications that might cause anxiety (such as some drugs used in treating asthma) will be reviewed. Since large amounts of caffeine, in coffee or soft drinks, can cause agitation, a clinician might look at the youngster's diet as well. Other biological, psychological, family, and social factors that might predispose the youngster to undue anxiety will also be considered.

If a teenager refuses to go to school, a clinician will explore other possible explanations before labeling it school avoidance. Perhaps the teen is being threatened or harassed, is depressed, or has an unrecognized learning disability. He may also be skipping school in order to be with friends, not from anxiety about performance or separation.

If the teenager has engaged in suicidal or self-endangering behavior, is trying to self medicate through alcohol or drug use, or is seriously depressed, these problems should be addressed immediately. In such cases, hospitalization may be recommended to protect the youngster.

In most cases, treatment of anxiety disorders focuses on reducing the symptoms of anxiety, relieving distress, preventing complications associated with the disorder, and minimizing the effects on the teen's social, school, and developmental progress. If the problem manifests in school avoidance, the initial goal will be to get the youngster back to school as soon as possible.

Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy In many cases, cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy techniques are effective in addressing adolescent anxiety disorders. Such approaches help the teenager examine his anxiety, anticipate situations in which it is likely to occur, and understand its effects. This can help a youngster recognize the exaggerated nature of his fears and develop a corrective approach to the problem. Moreover, cognitive-behavioral therapy tends to be specific to the anxiety problem, and the teen actively participates, which usually enhances the youngster's understanding.

Other Therapies In some instances, long-term psychotherapy, and family therapy may also be recommended.

Medications When symptoms are severe, a combination of therapy and medication may be used. Antidepressant medications, such as nortriptyline (Pamelor), imipramine (Tofranil), doxepin (Sinequan), paroxetine (Paxil), sertraline (Zoloft), or fluoxetine (Prozac), or anxiety-reducing drugs, such as alprazolam (Xanax), clonazepam (Klonopin), or lorazepam (Ativan) may be prescribed in combination with cognitive or other psychotherapy. When tricyclic antidepressant medications such as imipramine are pre-scribed, your teen's physician may want to monitor for potential side effects by conducting periodic physical exams and occasional electrocardiograms (EKGs).
Approximately 6% of pregnant women and 10% of postpartum women develop anxiety. Sometimes they experience anxiety alone, and sometimes they experience it in addition to depression.

Symptoms
The symptoms of anxiety during pregnancy or postpartum might include:

Constant worry
Feeling that something bad is going to happen
Racing thoughts
Disturbances of sleep and appetite
Inability to sit still
Physical symptoms like dizziness, hot flashes, and nausea
Risk Factors
Risk factors for perinatal anxiety and panic include a personal or family history of anxiety, previous perinatal depression or anxiety, or thyroid imbalance.

In addition to generalized anxiety, there are some specific forms of anxiety that you should know about. One is Postpartum Panic Disorder. This is a form of anxiety with which the sufferer feels very nervous and has recurring panic attacks. During a panic attack, she may experience shortness of breath, chest pain, claustrophobia, dizziness, heart palpitations, and numbness and tingling in the extremities. Panic attacks seem to go in waves, but it is important to know that they will pass and will not hurt you.

Another form of anxiety is Postpartum Obsessive Compulsive Disorder. Learn more about it here.

Postpartum and antepartum anxiety are temporary and treatable with professional help. If you feel you may be suffering from one of these illnesses, know that it is not your fault and you are not to blame. You can use our resource page to reach out now. We understand what you are going through and will connect you to people who understand and can help.
What is anxiety?
Anxiety is a feeling of worry, nervousness, or fear about an event or situation. It is a normal reaction to stress. Anxiety can help you stay alert for a challenging situation at work, study harder for an exam, or remain focused on an important speech. In general, it helps you cope. When it becomes hard to control and affects your day-to-day life, it can be disabling. 

What is an anxiety disorder?
Anxiety disorders happen when excessive anxiety interferes with your everyday activities such as going to work or school or spending time with friends or family. Anxiety disorders are serious mental illnesses. 

Anxiety disorders are the most common mental disorders in the United States. They affect up to 40 million American adults each year. Women are more than twice as likely as men to develop an anxiety disorder in their lifetime. Anxiety disorders are highly treatable, yet less than 37% of those suffering is treated.

What are the major types of anxiety disorders? 
There are several major types of anxiety disorders. They all have their own traits and impact people in distinct ways. 

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) causes excessive worry about regular aspects of life, like family or income. It can happen daily and make it hard to get through the day or sleep at night. 
Panic disorder involves frequent and sudden panic attacks, which are unexpected feelings of terror that happen without warning. Panic attacks can occur when there is no direct danger.
Phobias are a strong fear of something of little to no threat. This can include traveling by air or being around a large group of people.
What are the symptoms of anxiety disorders?
Anxiety disorders come with a mix of symptoms. They can vary by person and the type of anxiety disorder you have. Symptoms can also impact how you live and spend time with others.

There are many symptoms of anxiety. The symptoms below are shared across several types of anxiety disorders:

Anxious thoughts or beliefs
Feelings of fear and dread
Physical symptoms like a fast heartbeat or nausea
Changes in behavior like avoiding previous normal activities 
What causes anxiety disorders?
Several factors can cause anxiety disorder. They can vary from one woman to another. A few common causes include:

Traumatic events in childhood or adulthood
Hormonal changes during one’s menstrual cycle
A family history of anxiety or other mental disorders
What are common treatment options?
For some people, treatment can help ease anxiety symptoms. There are several types of treatments for anxiety available to help you manage your symptoms every day, such as: 

Counseling (psychotherapy or talk therapy)

This form of treatment includes talking with a trained mental health professional. Together, you can work through managing your anxiety.
Medicine

Medicine does not cure anxiety disorders but can help relieve symptoms. Health care providers can prescribe medicines for anxiety. The most common classes of medicines used to combat anxiety disorders are antidepressants, anti-anxiety medicines (such as benzodiazepines), and beta-blockers.
Talk with your health care provider to find out what treatment is right for you. You should also talk with your provider about the risks, benefits, and side effects before you start or stop a medical treatment.

Young female client having consultation with psychologist
How does my physical health affect my mental health?
People who are not physically healthy may have trouble staying mentally healthy. People living with chronic (long-term) health problems such as diabetes or heart disease are often more likely to have higher levels of stress and anxiety. Having a chronic disease does not always mean you will have a mental health condition like an anxiety disorder, but if you are struggling with both, know that you are not alone. Support groups and health care professionals can help. Healthy eating and other healthy habits, like exercise, yoga, or meditation can help improve physical health and reduce anxiety.

What should you do if you think you have an anxiety disorder?
Set up a visit to see a health care provider. At this visit, your primary care doctor will conduct an initial mental health screening. From there, they can refer you to a mental health specialist.
Get involved in your care. Be open about your symptoms and listen to your options. Give your input on the options you feel could be a good fit for you. 
Turn to people you trust for support. As you navigate life with an anxiety disorder, it helps to have people in your life that you trust. Find friends and support groups that you know will listen to your concerns and help you through tough times. 
SAMHSA 988 Graphic
Call or text the Suicide and Crisis Lifeline at 988 if you have immediate concerns about your mental health. The Lifeline provides 24/7, free and confidential support for people in distress, and prevention and crisis resources for you or your loved ones in the United States. Call 911 if you or someone you know is in immediate danger or go to the nearest emergency room. 
What do you need to know about anxiety disorders and pregnancy?
If you are thinking about becoming pregnant, are pregnant, or are breastfeeding, you should talk with your health care provider about any medicines you may take for anxiety. Some medicines can affect your unborn baby, but untreated mental health conditions can also affect an unborn baby. Some medicines may also pass to your baby through breast milk. Talk with your provider about what treatments are safe for you and your baby.

During pregnancy or as a new mother, you may feel overwhelmed at times. Mental health support and resources are available through the National Maternal Mental Health Hotline. It is free, confidential, and available 24/7. Call or text 1-833- TLC-MAMA (1-833-852-6262). 

Talk with your health care provider about all medical treatment options. Discuss their risks and benefits. Your provider can answer all your questions. Together, you can decide which treatment is right for you.

Diverse Women in Clinical Trials campaign 
Clinical trials are research studies that inform the safety of new treatments. This includes medications that treat anxiety. It is important that women of diverse backgrounds take part in clinical trials. It can lead to more treatment options that work for all women. Learn more about women in clinical trials.

This information was developed by the FDA Office of Women’s Health. It is for educational purposes, it is not all inclusive, and should not be used in place of talking to your health care provider.

For more women's health resources, go to: www.fda.gov/womens.
Generalized anxiety disorder - self-care
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook Twitter Pinterest
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a mental condition in which you're frequently worried or anxious about many things. Your anxiety may seem out of control and get in the way of everyday activities.

The right treatment can often improve GAD. You and your health care provider should make a treatment plan that could include talk therapy (psychotherapy), taking medicine, or both.

Taking Medicine
Certain medicines, often also used to treat depression, may be very helpful for this disorder, including:

An antidepressant, which can help with anxiety and depression. This kind of medicine may take weeks or months to start working. It is a safe medium- to long-term treatment for GAD.
A benzodiazepine, which acts faster than an antidepressant to control anxiety. However, benzodiazepines can become less effective and habit forming over time. Your provider may prescribe a benzodiazepine to help your anxiety while you wait for the antidepressant to work.
Other medicines such as hydroxyzine or gabapentin, which also act quickly.
When taking medicine for GAD:

Keep your provider informed about your symptoms. If a medicine isn't controlling symptoms, its dosage may need to be changed, or you may need to try a new medicine instead.
Do not change the dosage or stop taking the medicine without talking to your provider.
Take medicine at set times. For example, take it every day at breakfast. Check with your provider about the best time to take your medicine.
Ask your provider about side effects and what to do if they occur.
Therapy
Talk therapy takes place with a trained therapist. It helps you learn ways of managing and reducing your anxiety. Some forms of talk therapy can help you understand what causes your anxiety. This allows you to gain better control over it.

Many types of talk therapy may be helpful for GAD. One common and effective talk therapy is cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). CBT can help you understand the relationship between your thoughts, your behaviors, and your symptoms. Often, CBT involves a set number of visits. During CBT you can learn how to:

Understand and gain control of distorted views of stressors, such as other people's behavior or life events.
Recognize and replace panic-causing thoughts to help you feel more in control.
Manage stress and relax when symptoms occur.
Avoid thinking that minor problems will develop into terrible ones.
Other types of talk therapy may also be helpful in managing symptoms of an anxiety disorder.

Your provider can discuss talk therapy options with you. Then you can decide together if it is right for you.

Other Ways to Manage Your Anxiety
Taking medicine and going to talk therapy can get you started on the road to feeling better. Taking care of your body and relationships can help improve your condition. Here are some helpful tips:

Get enough sleep.
Eat healthy foods.
Keep a regular daily schedule.
Get out of the house every day.
Exercise every day. Even a little bit of exercise, such as a 15-minute walk, can help.
Stay away from alcohol and street drugs.
Talk with family or friends when you feel nervous or frightened.
Find out about different types of group activities you can join.
When to Call the Doctor
Call your provider if you:

Find it hard to control your anxiety
Do not sleep well
Feel sad or feel like you want to hurt yourself
Have physical symptoms from your anxiety
Generalized anxiety disorder
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook Twitter Pinterest
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a mental disorder in which a person is often worried or anxious about many things and finds it hard to control this anxiety.

Causes
The cause of GAD is unknown. Genes may play a role. Stress may also contribute to the development of GAD.

Stress and anxiety
GAD is a common condition. Anyone can develop this disorder, even children. GAD occurs more often in women than in men.

Symptoms
The main symptom is frequent worry or tension for at least 6 months, even when there is little or no clear cause. Worries often seem to float from one problem to another. Problems may involve family, other relationships, work, school, money, and health.

Generalized anxiety disorder
Even when they are aware that worries or fears are stronger than appropriate for the situation, a person with GAD still has difficulty controlling them.

Other symptoms of GAD include:

Problems concentrating
Fatigue
Irritability
Problems falling or staying asleep, or sleep that is restless and unsatisfying
Restlessness when awake
The person may also have other physical symptoms. These can include muscle tension, upset stomach, sweating, or difficulty breathing.

Exams and Tests
There is no test that can make a diagnosis of GAD. The diagnosis is based on your answers to questions about the symptoms of GAD. Your health care provider will ask about these symptoms. You will also be asked about other aspects of your mental and physical health. A physical exam or lab tests may be done to check for other conditions that cause similar symptoms.

Treatment
The goal of treatment is to help you feel better and function well in daily life. Talk therapy or medicine alone can be helpful. Sometimes, a combination of these may work best.

TALK THERAPY

Many types of talk therapy may be helpful for GAD. One common and effective talk therapy is cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). CBT can help you understand the relationship between your thoughts, behaviors, and symptoms. Often CBT involves a set number of visits. During CBT you can learn how to:

Understand and gain control of distorted views of stressors, such as other people's behavior or life events.
Recognize and replace panic-causing thoughts to help you feel more in control.
Manage stress and relax when symptoms occur.
Avoid thinking that minor problems will develop into terrible ones.
Other types of talk therapy may also be helpful in managing symptoms of an anxiety disorder. Your provider can discuss talk therapy options with you. Then you can decide together if it is right for you.

MEDICINES

Certain medicines, often also used to treat depression, may be very helpful for this disorder. They work by preventing your symptoms or making them less severe. You must take these medicines every day. DO NOT stop taking them without talking with your provider. They include:

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which are most often the first choice of antidepressants
Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), which are another choice
Other medicines such as hydroxyzine or medicines used to treat seizures, like gabapentin, may also be tried. These medicines act more quickly and may be taken as needed rather than regularly.

Medicines called sedatives or hypnotics may also be prescribed.

These medicines should only be taken under a provider's direction.
Your provider will prescribe a limited amount of these medicines. They should not to be used every day.
They may be used when symptoms become very severe or when you are about to be exposed to something that always brings on your symptoms.
If you are prescribed a sedative, do not drink alcohol while on this medicine.
SELF-CARE

Other than taking medicine and going to therapy, you can help yourself get better by:

Reducing caffeine intake
Not using street drugs or large amounts of alcohol
Exercising, getting enough rest, and eating healthy foods
Keeping a regular schedule and getting out of the house every day
Support Groups
You can ease the stress of having GAD by joining a support group. Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone. Support groups are usually not a good substitute for talk therapy or taking medicine, but can be a helpful addition.

Anxiety and Depression Association of America -- adaa.org/supportgroups
National Institute of Mental Health -- www.nimh.nih.gov/health/find-help
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on how severe the condition is. In some cases, GAD is long-term and is difficult to treat. Most people get better with medicine or talk therapy.

Possible Complications
Depression and substance abuse may occur with an anxiety disorder.

When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you frequently worry or feel anxious, especially if it interferes with your daily activities.
Stress and your health
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook Twitter Pinterest
Stress is a feeling of emotional or physical tension. It can come from any event or thought that makes you feel frustrated, angry, or nervous.

Stress is your body's reaction to a challenge or demand. In short bursts, stress can be positive, such as when it helps you avoid danger or meet a deadline. But when stress lasts for a long time, it may harm your health.

Stress and anxiety
Considerations
Stress is a normal feeling. There are two main types of stress:

Acute stress. This is short-term stress that goes away quickly. You feel it when you slam on the brakes, have a fight with your partner, or ski down a steep slope. It helps you manage dangerous situations. It also occurs when you do something new or exciting. All people have acute stress at one time or another.
Chronic stress. This is stress that lasts for a longer period of time. You may have chronic stress if you have money problems, an unhappy marriage, or trouble at work. Any type of stress that goes on for weeks or months is chronic stress. You can become so used to chronic stress that you don't realize it is a problem. If you don't find ways to manage stress, it may lead to health problems.
STRESS AND YOUR BODY

Your body reacts to stress by releasing hormones. These hormones make your brain more alert, cause your muscles to tense, and increase your pulse. In the short term, these reactions are good because they can help you handle the situation causing stress. This is your body's way of protecting itself.

When you have chronic stress, your body stays alert, even though there is no danger. Over time, this puts you at risk for health problems, including:

High blood pressure
Heart disease
Diabetes
Obesity
Depression or anxiety
Skin problems, such as acne or eczema
Menstrual problems
If you already have a health condition, chronic stress can make it worse.

SIGNS OF TOO MUCH STRESS

Stress can cause many types of physical and emotional symptoms. Sometimes, you may not realize these symptoms are caused by stress. Here are some signs that stress may be affecting you:

Diarrhea or constipation
Forgetfulness
Frequent aches and pains
Headaches
Lack of energy or focus
Sexual problems
Stiff jaw or neck
Tiredness
Trouble sleeping or sleeping too much
Upset stomach
Use of alcohol or drugs to relax
Weight loss or gain
Causes
The causes of stress are different for each person. You can have stress from good challenges as well as bad ones. Some common sources of stress include:

Getting married or divorced
Starting a new job
The death of a spouse or close family member
Getting laid off
Retiring
Having a baby
Money problems
Moving
Having a serious illness
Problems at work
Problems at home
Generalized anxiety disorder
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you feel overwhelmed by stress, or if it is affecting your health. Also call your provider if you notice new or unusual symptoms.

Reasons you may want to seek help are:

You have feelings of panic, such as dizziness, rapid breathing, or a racing heartbeat.
You are unable to work or function at home or at your job.
You have fears that you cannot control.
You are having memories of a traumatic event.
Your provider may refer you to a mental health care provider. You can talk to this professional about your feelings, what seems to make your stress better or worse, and why you think you are having this problem. You may also work on developing ways to reduce stress in your life.

If you or someone you know is thinking about suicide, call or text 988 or chat 988lifeline.org. You can also call 1-800-273-8255 (1-800-273-TALK). The 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline provides free and confidential support 24/7, anytime day or night.

You can also call 911 or the local emergency number or go to the hospital emergency room. DO NOT delay.

If someone you know has attempted suicide, call 911 or the local emergency number right away. DO NOT leave the person alone, even after you have called for help.

Alternative Names
Anxiety; Feeling uptight; Stress; Tension; Jitters; Apprehension
Generalized anxiety disorder in children
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook Twitter Pinterest
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a mental disorder in which a child is often worried or anxious about many things and finds it hard to control this anxiety.

Causes
The cause of GAD is unknown. Genes may play a role. Children with family members who have an anxiety disorder also may be more likely to have one. Stress may be a factor in developing GAD.

Things in a child's life that can cause stress and anxiety include:

Loss, such as death of a loved one or parents' divorce
Big life changes, such as moving to a new town
A history of abuse
Living with family with members who are fearful, anxious, or violent
GAD is a common condition, affecting about 2% to 6% of children. GAD usually does not occur until puberty. It is more often seen in girls than in boys.

Symptoms
The main symptom is frequent worry or tension for at least 6 months, even with little or no clear cause. Worries seem to float from one problem to another. Children with anxiety commonly focus their worries on:

Doing well at school and sports. They may have the feeling that they need to perform perfectly or otherwise feel they are not doing well.
The safety of themselves or their family. They may feel intense fear of natural calamities such as earthquakes, tornados, or home break-ins.
Illness in themselves or their family. They may worry excessively over minor illnesses they have or be fearful of developing new illnesses.
Even when the child is aware that worries or fears are excessive, a child with GAD still has difficulty controlling them. The child often needs reassurance.

Other symptoms of GAD include:

Problems concentrating, or the mind going blank
Fatigue
Irritability
Problems falling or staying asleep, or sleep that is restless and unsatisfying
Restlessness when awake
Not eating enough or overeating
Outbursts of anger
A pattern of being disobedient, hostile, and defiant
Expecting the worst, even when there is no apparent reason for concern.

Your child may also have other physical symptoms such as:

Muscle tension
Upset stomach
Sweating
Difficulty breathing
Headaches
Anxiety symptoms can affect a child's daily life. They can make it hard for the child to sleep, eat, and perform well in school.

Exams and Tests
Your child's health care provider will ask about your child's symptoms. GAD is diagnosed based on your and your child's answers to these questions.

You and your child will also be asked about their mental and physical health, problems at school, or behavior with friends and family. A physical exam or lab tests may be done to rule out other conditions that can cause similar symptoms.

Treatment
The goal of treatment is to help your child feel better and function well in daily life. In less severe cases, talk therapy or medicine alone can be helpful. In more severe cases, a combination of these may work best.

TALK THERAPY

Many types of talk therapy may be helpful for GAD. One common and effective type of talk therapy is cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). CBT can help your child understand the relationship between their thoughts, behaviors, and symptoms. CBT often involves a set number of visits. During CBT, your child can learn how to:

Understand and gain control of distorted views of stressors, such as life events or other people's behavior
Recognize and replace panic-causing thoughts to help them feel more in control
Manage stress and relax when symptoms occur
Avoid thinking that minor problems will develop into terrible ones
MEDICINES

Sometimes, medicines are used to help control anxiety in children. Commonly prescribed medicines for GAD include antidepressants and sedatives. These may be used short-term or long-term. Talk with the provider to learn about your child's medicine, including possible side effects and interactions. Be sure your child takes any medicine as prescribed.

Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a child does depends on how severe the condition is. In some cases, GAD is long-term and is difficult to treat. However, most children get better with medicine, talk therapy, or both.

Possible Complications
Having an anxiety disorder can put a child at risk for depression and substance abuse.

When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your child's provider if your child frequently worries or feels anxious, and it interferes with their daily activities.

Alternative Names
GAD - children; Anxiety disorder - children
Separation anxiety in children
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook Twitter Pinterest
Separation anxiety in children is a developmental stage in which the child is anxious when separated from the primary caregiver (usually the mother).

Causes
As infants grow, their emotions and reactions to the world around them seem to occur in a predictable order. Before 8 months, infants are so new to the world that they lack a sense of what is normal and safe and what may be dangerous. As a result, new settings or people seem to not frighten them.

From 8 to 14 months, children often become frightened when they meet new people or visit new places. They recognize their parents as familiar and safe. When separated from their parents, they feel threatened and unsafe.

Separation anxiety is a normal stage as a child grows and develops. It helped keep our ancestors alive and helps children learn how to master the world around them.

It usually ends when the child is around 2 years old. At this age, toddlers begin to understand that parents may be out of sight now, but will return later. It's also normal for them to test their independence.

To get over separation anxiety, children need to:

Feel safe in their home.
Trust people other than their parents.
Trust that their parents will return.
Even after children have mastered this stage, separation anxiety may return in times of stress. Most children will feel some degree of separation anxiety when in unfamiliar situations, most often when separated from their parents.

When children are in situations (such as hospitals) and are under stress (such as illness or pain), they seek the safety, comfort, and protection of their parents. Since anxiety can worsen pain, staying with a child as much as possible can reduce the pain.

Symptoms
A child with severe separation anxiety may have any of the following:

Excessive distress when separated from the primary caregiver
Nightmares
Reluctance to go to school or other places because of fear of separation
Reluctance to go to sleep without the primary caregiver nearby
Repeated physical complaints
Worry about losing, or harm coming to the primary caregiver
Exams and Tests
There are no tests for this condition, because it is normal.

If severe separation anxiety persists past age 2, a visit with a health care provider may help determine if the child has an anxiety disorder or other condition.

Treatment
No treatment is needed for normal separation anxiety.

Parents can help their infant or toddler adjust to their absence by letting trusted caregivers babysit the child. This helps the child learn to trust and bond with other adults and understand that their parents will return.

During medical procedures, a parent should go with the child if possible. When a parent can't go with the child, exposing the child to the situation beforehand may be helpful, such as visiting the doctor's office before a test.

Some hospitals have child life specialists who can explain procedures and medical conditions to children of all ages. If your child is very anxious and needs extended medical care, ask your provider about such services.

When it's not possible for parents to be with the child, such as for surgery, explain the experience to the child. Reassure the child that a parent is waiting, and where.

For older children who have not outgrown separation anxiety, treatments may include:

Anti-anxiety medicines
Changes in parenting techniques
Counseling for the parents and child
Treatment for severe cases may include:

Family education
Family therapy
Talk therapy
Outlook (Prognosis)
Young children with symptoms that improve after age 2 are normal, even if some anxiety comes back later during stress. When separation anxiety occurs in adolescence, it may signal the development of an anxiety disorder.

When to Contact a Medical Professional
Call your provider if your child has severe separation anxiety after age 2.
Palliative care - fear and anxiety
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook Twitter Pinterest
It is normal for someone who is sick to feel uneasy, restless, afraid, or anxious. Certain thoughts, pain, or trouble breathing may trigger these feelings. Palliative care providers can help the person cope with these symptoms and feelings.

Palliative Care
Palliative care is a holistic approach to care that focuses on treating pain and symptoms and improving quality of life in people with serious illnesses and a limited life span.

When You Have Fear or Anxiety
Fear or anxiety may lead to:

Feelings that things are not right
Fear
Worry
Confusion
Unable to pay attention, focus, or concentrate
Loss of control
Tension
Your body may express what you are feeling in these ways:

Trouble relaxing
Trouble getting comfortable
Needing to move for no reason
Fast breathing
Fast heartbeat
Shaking or tremors
Muscle twitches
Sweating
Trouble sleeping
Bad dreams or nightmares
Extreme restlessness (called agitation)
How to Help Yourself
Think about what worked in the past. What helps when you feel fear or anxiety? Were you able to do something about it? For example, if the fear or anxiety started with a pain, did taking pain medicine help?

To help you relax:

Breathe slowly and deeply for a few minutes.
Listen to music that calms you.
Slowly count backward from 100 to 0.
Do yoga, qigong, or tai chi.
Have someone massage your hands, feet, arms, or back.
Pet a cat or dog.
Ask someone to read to you.
To prevent feeling anxious:

When you need to rest, tell visitors to come another time.
Take your medicine as it was prescribed.
Do not drink alcohol.
Do not have drinks with caffeine.
Many people find they can prevent or manage these feelings if they can talk to someone they trust.

Talk to a friend or loved one who is willing to listen.
When you see your doctor or nurse, talk about your fears.
If you have worries about money or other issues, or just want to talk about your feelings, ask to see a social worker.
Your health care provider can give you medicine to help with these feelings. Do not be afraid to use it the way it is prescribed. If you have questions or concerns about the medicine, ask your provider or pharmacist.

When to Call the Doctor
Call your provider when you have:

Feelings that may be causing your anxiety (such as fear of dying or worrying about money)
Concerns about your illness
Problems with family or friend relationships
Spiritual concerns
Signs and symptoms that your anxiety is changing or getting worse
Alternative Names
End of life care - fear and anxiety; Hospice care - fear and anxiety
Anxiety is a normal reaction to stress. Mild levels of anxiety can be beneficial in some situations. It can alert us to dangers and help us prepare and pay attention. Anxiety disorders differ from normal feelings of nervousness or anxiousness and involve excessive fear or anxiety. Anxiety disorders are the most common of mental disorders. They affect nearly 30% of adults at some point in their lives. However, anxiety disorders are treatable with a number of psychotherapeutic treatments. Treatment helps most people lead normal productive lives.

Anxiety refers to anticipation of a future concern and is more associated with muscle tension and avoidance behavior.

Fear is an emotional response to an immediate threat and is more associated with a fight or flight reaction – either staying to fight or leaving to escape danger.

Anxiety disorders can cause people to try to avoid situations that trigger or worsen their symptoms. Job performance, schoolwork and personal relationships can be affected. In general, for a person to be diagnosed with an anxiety disorder, the fear or anxiety must:

Be out of proportion to the situation or be age-inappropriate
Hinder their ability to function normally
There are several types of anxiety disorders: generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder with or without agoraphobia, specific phobias, agoraphobia, social anxiety disorder, separation anxiety disorder and selective mutism.


How Common Are Anxiety Disorders?
In any given year the estimated percent of U.S. adults with various anxiety disorders are*:

Specific Phobia: 8% - 12% (U.S.)
Social Anxiety Disorder: 7% (U.S.)
Panic Disorder: 2% - 3% (U.S.)
Agoraphobia: 1-1.7% (adolescents and adults; worldwide)
Generalized Anxiety Disorder: 0.9% (adolescents)' 2.9% (adults)
Separation Anxiety Disorder: 4% (children); 1.6% (adolescents); 0.9%-1.9% (adults)
Selective mutism: 0.03-1.9% (U.S., Europe, Israel)
Women are more likely than men to experience anxiety disorders.

Types of Anxiety Disorders
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder involves persistent and excessive worry that interferes with daily activities. This ongoing worry and tension may be accompanied by physical symptoms, such as restlessness, feeling on edge or easily fatigued, difficulty concentrating, muscle tension or problems sleeping. Often the worries focus on everyday things such as job responsibilities, family health or minor matters such as chores, car repairs, or appointments.

Panic Disorder
The core symptom of panic disorder is recurrent panic attacks, an overwhelming combination of physical and psychological distress. During an attack, several of these symptoms occur in combination:

Palpitations, pounding heart or rapid heart rate
Sweating
Trembling or shaking
Feeling of shortness of breath or smothering sensations
Chest pain
Feeling dizzy, light-headed or faint
Feeling of choking
Numbness or tingling
Chills or hot flashes
Nausea or abdominal pains
Feeling detached
Fear of losing control
Fear of dying
Because the symptoms can be quite severe, some people who experience a panic attack may believe they are having a heart attack or some other life-threatening illness. They may go to a hospital emergency department. Panic attacks may be expected, such as a response to a feared object, or unexpected, apparently occurring for no reason. The mean age for onset of panic disorder is 20-24. Panic attacks may occur with other mental disorders such as depression or PTSD.

Phobias, Specific Phobia
A specific phobia is excessive and persistent fear of a specific object, situation or activity that is generally not harmful. Patients know their fear is excessive, but they can't overcome it. These fears cause such distress that some people go to extreme lengths to avoid what they fear. Examples are public speaking, fear of flying or fear of spiders.

Agoraphobia
Agoraphobia is the fear of being in situations where escape may be difficult or embarrassing, or help might not be available in the event of panic symptoms. The fear is out of proportion to the actual situation and lasts generally six months or more and causes problems in functioning. A person with agoraphobia experiences this fear in two or more of the following situations:

Using public transportation
Being in open spaces
Being in enclosed places
Standing in line or being in a crowd
Being outside the home alone
The individual actively avoids the situation, requires a companion or endures with intense fear or anxiety. Untreated agoraphobia can become so serious that a person may be unable to leave the house. A person can only be diagnosed with agoraphobia if the fear is intensely upsetting, or if it significantly interferes with normal daily activities.

Social Anxiety Disorder (previously called social phobia)
A person with social anxiety disorder has significant anxiety and discomfort about being embarrassed, humiliated, rejected or looked down on in social interactions. People with this disorder will try to avoid the situation or endure it with great anxiety. Common examples are extreme fear of public speaking, meeting new people or eating/drinking in public. The fear or anxiety causes problems with daily functioning and lasts at least six months.

Separation Anxiety Disorder
A person with separation anxiety disorder is excessively fearful or anxious about separation from those with whom he or she is attached. The feeling is beyond what is appropriate for the person's age, persists (at least four weeks in children and six months in adults) and causes problems functioning. A person with separation anxiety disorder may be persistently worried about losing the person closest to him or her, may be reluctant or refuse to go out or sleep away from home or without that person, or may experience nightmares about separation. Physical symptoms of distress often develop in childhood, but symptoms can carry though adulthood.

Selective Mutism
Children with selective mutism do not speak in some social situations where they are expected to speak, such as school, even though they speak in other situations. They will speak in their home around immediate family members, but often will not speak even in front of others, such as close friends or grandparents.

The lack of speech may interfere with social communication, although children with this disorder sometimes use non-spoken or nonverbal means (e.g., grunting, pointing, writing). The lack of speech can also have significant consequences in school, leading to academic problems and social isolation. Many children with selective mutism also experience excessive shyness, fear of social embarrassment and high social anxiety. However, they typically have normal language skills.

Selective mutism usually begins before age 5, but it may not be formally identified until the child enters school. Many children will outgrow selective mutism. For children who also have social anxiety disorder, selective mutism may disappear, but symptoms of social anxiety disorder may remain.

Risk Factors
The causes of anxiety disorders are currently unknown but likely involve a combination of factors including genetic, environmental, psychological and developmental. Anxiety disorders can run in families, suggesting that a combination of genes and environmental stresses can produce the disorders.

Diagnosis and Treatment
The first step is to see your doctor to make sure there is no physical problem causing the symptoms. If an anxiety disorder is diagnosed, a mental health professional can work with you on finding the best treatment. Unfortunately, many people with anxiety disorders don't seek help. They don't realize that they have a condition for which there are effective treatments.

Although each anxiety disorder has unique characteristics, most respond well to two types of treatment: psychotherapy or "talk therapy," and medications. These treatments can be given alone or in combination. Cognitive behavior therapy (CBT), a type of talk therapy, can help a person learn a different way of thinking, reacting and behaving to help feel less anxious. Medications will not cure anxiety disorders, but can provide significant relief from symptoms. The most commonly used medications are anti-anxiety medications (generally prescribed only for a short period of time) and antidepressants. Beta-blockers, used for heart conditions, are sometimes used to control physical symptoms of anxiety.

Self-Help, Coping, and Managing
There are a number of things people do to help cope with symptoms of anxiety disorders and make treatment more effective. Stress management techniques and meditation can be helpful. Support groups (in-person or online) can provide an opportunity to share experiences and coping strategies. Learning more about the specifics of a disorder and helping family and friends to understand the condition better can also be helpful. Avoid caffeine, which can worsen symptoms, and check with your doctor about any medications.

Related Conditions
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
Acute stress disorder
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Adjustment disorder
