What is bipolar disorder?
Bipolar disorder is a mood disorder that can cause intense mood swings:

Sometimes you may feel extremely "up," elated, irritable, or energized. This is called a manic episode.
Other times you may feel "down," sad, indifferent, or hopeless. This is called a depressive episode.
You may have both manic and depressive symptoms together. This is called a mixed episode.
Along with mood swings, bipolar disorder causes changes in behavior, energy levels, and activity levels.

Bipolar disorder used to be called other names, including manic depression and manic-depressive disorder.

What are the types of bipolar disorder?
There are three main types of bipolar disorder:

Bipolar I disorder involves manic episodes that last at least 7 days or manic symptoms so severe that you need immediate hospital care. Depressive episodes are also common. Those often last at least two weeks. This type of bipolar disorder can also involve mixed episodes.
Bipolar II disorder involves depressive episodes. But instead of full-blown manic episodes, there are episodes of hypomania. Hypomania is a less severe version of mania.
Cyclothymic disorder, or cyclothymia, also involves hypomanic and depressive symptoms. But they are not as intense or as long-lasting as hypomanic or depressive episodes. The symptoms usually last for at least two years in adults and for one year in children and teenagers.
With any of these types, having four or more episodes of mania or depression in a year is called "rapid cycling."

What causes bipolar disorder?
The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown. Several factors likely play a role in the disorder. They include genetics, brain structure and function, and your environment.

Who is at risk for bipolar disorder?
You are at higher risk for bipolar disorder if you have a close relative who has it. Going through trauma or stressful life events may raise this risk even more.

What are the symptoms of bipolar disorder?
The symptoms of bipolar disorder can vary. But they involve mood swings known as mood episodes:

The symptoms of a manic episode can include
Feeling very up, high, or elated
Feeling jumpy or wired, more active than usual
Having a very short temper or seeming extremely irritable
Having racing thoughts and talking very fast
Needing less sleep
Feeling like you are unusually important, talented, or powerful
Do risky things that show poor judgment, such as eating and drinking too much, spending or giving away a lot of money, or having reckless sex
The symptoms of a depressive episode can include
Feeling very sad, hopeless, or worthless
Feeling lonely or isolating yourself from others
Talking very slowly, feeling like you have nothing to say, or forgetting a lot
Having little energy
Sleeping too much
Eating too much or too little
Lack of interest in your usual activities and being unable to do even simple things
Thinking about death or suicide
The symptoms of a mixed episode include both manic and depressive symptoms together. For example, you may feel very sad, empty, or hopeless, while at the same time feeling extremely energized.
Some people with bipolar disorder may have milder symptoms. For example, you may have hypomania instead of mania. With hypomania, you may feel very good and find that you can get a lot done. You may not feel like anything is wrong. But your family and friends may notice your mood swings and changes in activity levels. They may realize that your behavior is unusual for you. After the hypomania, you might have severe depression.

Your mood episodes may last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, symptoms usually occur every day for most of the day.

How is bipolar disorder diagnosed?
To diagnose bipolar disorder, your health care provider may use many tools:

A physical exam
A medical history, which will include asking about your symptoms, lifetime history, experiences, and family history
Medical tests to rule out other conditions
A mental health evaluation. Your provider may do the evaluation or may refer you to a mental health specialist to get one.
What are the treatments for bipolar disorder?
Treatment can help many people, including those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder. The main treatments for bipolar disorder include medicines, psychotherapy, or both:

Medicines can help control the symptoms of bipolar disorder. You may need to try several different medicines to find which one works best for you. Some people need to take more than one medicine. It's important to take your medicine consistently. Don't stop taking it without first talking with your provider. Contact your provider if you have any concerns about side effects from the medicines.
Psychotherapy (talk therapy) can help you recognize and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. It can give you and your family support, education, skills, and coping strategies. There are several different types of psychotherapy that may help with bipolar disorder.
Other treatment options include:
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), a brain stimulation procedure that can help relieve symptoms. It uses a mild electric current and is done while you are under general anesthesia. ECT is most often used for severe bipolar disorder that is not getting better with other treatments. It may also be used when someone needs a treatment that will work more quickly than medicines. This might be when a person has a high risk of suicide or is catatonic (unresponsive).
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), a brain stimulation procedure that uses magnetic waves to relieve depression. It is not as powerful as ECT, but with rTMS, you don't need general anesthesia. It also has a low risk of negative effects on your memory and thinking.
Light therapy has been shown to be effective for seasonal affective disorder (SAD). Many people with bipolar disorder also find that their depression gets worse during certain seasons, usually in the fall and winter. Light therapy may help with their symptoms.
Healthy lifestyle changes, such as getting regular exercise, having a consistent sleep schedule, and keeping a mood journal, can also help with your symptoms.
Bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness. But long-term, ongoing treatment can help manage your symptoms and enable you to live a healthy, successful life.
What is bipolar disorder?
Bipolar disorder is a mental illness that causes extreme mood swings between happy and sad. Other names are manic depression or manic-depressive illness. People of all ages and genders can have it.

There are different kinds of bipolar disorder. They vary based on your symptoms and how often and sudden you have mood swings, or episodes.

Symptoms of bipolar disorder
Most people with mood swings don’t have bipolar disorder. However, intense mood swings are the main symptom of the disorder. At times, you may feel very happy, full of energy, and able to do anything. This can make you excited and unable to rest. This is called mania. At other times, you may feel very sad and alone. This can be painful and make you not want to do anything. This is called depression. People who have bipolar disorder alternate between mania and depression. It’s even possible to have symptoms of both at the same time. Your mood swings may be frequent and short, or spread out and last longer.

Other signs of mania include:

Feeling powerful and important.
Feeling excited or wired.
Feeling irritated or sensitive.
Having trouble focusing.
Not sleeping well or at all.
Being more active than usual.
Spending a lot of money.
Abusing alcohol and drugs.
Doing risky or reckless things, including sexual acts.
Thinking and talking so fast that other people can’t follow your thoughts.
Other signs of depression include:

No interest or pleasure in things you used to enjoy, including sex.
Feeling sad or numb.
Crying easily or for no reason.
Feeling slowed down.
Feeling tired all of the time.
Feeling hopeless, worthless, or guilty.
Losing or gaining weight.
Having trouble focusing, remembering, or making decisions.
Having headaches, backaches, or digestive problems.
Having trouble sleeping or wanting to sleep all of the time.
Having thoughts about death and suicide.
What causes bipolar disorder?
Bipolar disorder may be caused by a chemical imbalance in the brain. Genetics may be a factor. You have a greater chance of having bipolar disorder if it runs in your family.

How is bipolar disorder diagnosed?
Talk to your doctor if you think you have bipolar disorder. The doctor can do a physical exam and mental assessment. Usually, bipolar disorder is first diagnosed in a person when he or she is a young adult.

People who have bipolar disorder seek care when they’re depressed more often than when they’re manic. This can make it hard to diagnose the condition correctly. Be prepared to share all of your symptoms, health, and family history with your doctor. You may consider taking a family member or loved one to your appointment. A correct diagnosis gives you the best chance at getting helpful treatment.

Can bipolar disorder be prevented or avoided?
You can’t prevent or avoid bipolar disorder.

Bipolar disorder treatment
Some people who have bipolar disorder don’t want to get treatment. Some don’t think they need treatment. Some think they can get better on their own. Often, they don’t realize how much the disorder affects their lives and the lives of the people around them. However, don’t be embarrassed to go to the doctor for bipolar disorder. Your doctor can help you manage your symptoms and balance your emotions.

You and your doctor will work together to create a treatment plan. Medicines are an important part of that plan. Some are used to stop the mood swings. Mood stabilizers can even out the highs and lows in your mood. Antidepressant medicine can help reduce the symptoms of depression. It’s important to tell your doctor if you’re taking any over-the-counter medicines. He or she can tell you if they will affect your antidepressants. Your doctor may add other medicines, too, based on your symptoms.

Note the medicines may not work right away. It may take a few weeks before you notice a difference in your moods. Continue to take your medicines per your doctor’s orders. It’s important to be consistent in order to get the best outcome.

It’s also important to get counseling if you have bipolar disorder. This is a big part of treatment. It can help you with stress, concerns, and relationship problems.

Living with bipolar disorder
If you have bipolar disorder, it’s likely you will always have some degree of it. Treatment can help reduce your symptoms, but other things help, too. They include:

Research and learn about bipolar disorder. Ask your doctor for resources. Involve your family and tell them about the condition.
Stick to a regular routine. Go to bed and wake up at about the same time each day. Eat healthy meals. Exercise at regular times.
Get outside. Outdoor activities are essential to maintain a stable mood.
Take your medicine every day. Don’t stop taking it, even if you start to feel better. It may take time for your medicine and therapy to have an effect on your life. Try to be patient and stay focused on your goals.
Ask your doctor if you can drink caffeine or alcohol with your medicine.
Learn the early warning signs of your illness. Tell your doctor when you notice changes in your mood, thoughts, or behavior.
Join a support group. You and your family can share information and experiences with the support group. Hearing from others in similar situations can help.
Bipolar Disorder
Bipolar Disorder Cover
Download PDF
Order a free hardcopy
En español
Do you have periods of time when you feel unusually “up” (happy and outgoing, or irritable), but other periods when you feel “down” (unusually sad or anxious)? During the “up” periods, do you have increased energy or activity and feel a decreased need for sleep, while during the “down” times you have low energy, hopelessness, and sometimes suicidal thoughts? Do these symptoms of fluctuating mood and energy levels cause you distress or affect your daily functioning? Some people with these symptoms have a lifelong but treatable mental illness called bipolar disorder.

What is bipolar disorder?
Bipolar disorder is a mental illness that can be chronic (persistent or constantly reoccurring) or episodic (occurring occasionally and at irregular intervals). People sometimes refer to bipolar disorder with the older terms “manic-depressive disorder” or “manic depression.”

Everyone experiences normal ups and downs, but with bipolar disorder, the range of mood changes can be extreme. People with the disorder have manic episodes, or unusually elevated moods in which the individual might feel very happy, irritable, or “up,” with a marked increase in activity level. They might also have depressive episodes, in which they feel sad, indifferent, or hopeless, combined with a very low activity level. Some people have hypomanic episodes, which are like manic episodes, but not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social or occupational functioning or require hospitalization.

Most of the time, bipolar disorder symptoms start during late adolescence or early adulthood. Occasionally, children may experience bipolar disorder symptoms. Although symptoms may come and go, bipolar disorder usually requires lifelong treatment and does not go away on its own. Bipolar disorder can be an important factor in suicide, job loss, ability to function, and family discord. However, proper treatment can lead to better functioning and improved quality of life.

What are the symptoms of bipolar disorder?
Symptoms of bipolar disorder can vary. An individual with the disorder may have manic episodes, depressive episodes, or “mixed” episodes. A mixed episode has both manic and depressive symptoms. These mood episodes cause symptoms that last a week or two, or sometimes longer. During an episode, the symptoms last every day for most of the day. Feelings are intense and happen with changes in behavior, energy levels, or activity levels that are noticeable to others. In between episodes, mood usually returns to a healthy baseline. But in many cases, without adequate treatment, episodes occur more frequently as time goes on.

Symptoms of a Manic Episode	Symptoms of a Depressive Episode
Feeling very up, high, elated, or extremely irritable or touchy	Feeling very down or sad, or anxious
Feeling jumpy or wired, more active than usual	Feeling slowed down or restless
Racing thoughts	Trouble concentrating or making decisions
Decreased need for sleep	Trouble falling asleep, waking up too early, or sleeping too much
Talking fast about a lot of different things (“flight of ideas”)	Talking very slowly, feeling unable to find anything to say, or forgetting a lot
Excessive appetite for food, drinking, sex, or other pleasurable activities	Lack of interest in almost all activities
Feeling able to do many things at once without getting tired	Unable to do even simple things
Feeling unusually important, talented, or powerful	Feeling hopeless or worthless, or thinking about death or suicide
Some people with bipolar disorder may have milder symptoms than others. For example, hypomanic episodes may make an individual feel very good and productive; they may not feel like anything is wrong. However, family and friends may notice the mood swings and changes in activity levels as unusual behavior, and depressive episodes may follow hypomanic episodes.

Types of Bipolar Disorder
People are diagnosed with three basic types of bipolar disorder that involve clear changes in mood, energy, and activity levels. These moods range from manic episodes to depressive episodes.

Bipolar I disorder is defined by manic episodes that last at least 7 days (most of the day, nearly every day) or when manic symptoms are so severe that hospital care is needed. Usually, separate depressive episodes occur as well, typically lasting at least 2 weeks. Episodes of mood disturbance with mixed features are also possible. The experience of four or more episodes of mania or depression within a year is termed “rapid cycling.”
Bipolar II disorder is defined by a pattern of depressive and hypomanic episodes, but the episodes are less severe than the manic episodes in bipolar I disorder.
Cyclothymic disorder (also called cyclothymia) is defined by recurrent hypomanic and depressive symptoms that are not intense enough or do not last long enough to qualify as hypomanic or depressive episodes.
“Other specified and unspecified bipolar and related disorders” is a diagnosis that refers to bipolar disorder symptoms that do not match the three major types of bipolar disorder outlined above.

What causes bipolar disorder?
The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown. However, research suggests that a combination of factors may contribute to the illness.

Genes
Bipolar disorder often runs in families, and research suggests this is mostly explained by heredity—people with certain genes are more likely to develop bipolar disorder than others. Many genes are involved, and no one gene can cause the disorder.

But genes are not the only factor. Studies of identical twins have shown that one twin can develop bipolar disorder while the other does not. Though people with a parent or sibling with bipolar disorder are more likely to develop it, most people with a family history of bipolar disorder will not develop it.

Brain Structure and Function
Research shows that the brain structure and function of people with bipolar disorder may differ from those of people who do not have bipolar disorder or other mental disorders. Learning about the nature of these brain changes helps researchers better understand bipolar disorder and, in the future, may help predict which types of treatment will work best for a person with bipolar disorder.

How is bipolar disorder diagnosed?
To diagnose bipolar disorder, a health care provider may complete a physical exam, order medical testing to rule out other illnesses, and refer the person for an evaluation by a mental health professional. Bipolar disorder is diagnosed based on the severity, length, and frequency of an individual’s symptoms and experiences over their lifetime.

Some people have bipolar disorder for years before it’s diagnosed for several reasons. People with bipolar II disorder may seek help only for depressive episodes and hypomanic episodes may go unnoticed. Misdiagnosis may happen because some bipolar disorder symptoms are like those of other illnesses. For example, people with bipolar disorder who also have psychotic symptoms can be misdiagnosed with schizophrenia. Some health conditions, such as thyroid disease, can cause symptoms like those of bipolar disorder. The effects of recreational and illicit drugs can sometimes mimic or worsen mood symptoms.

Conditions That Can Co-Occur With Bipolar Disorder
Many people with bipolar disorder also have other mental disorders or conditions such as anxiety disorders, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), misuse of drugs or alcohol, or eating disorders. Sometimes people who have severe manic or depressive episodes also have symptoms of psychosis, such as hallucinations or delusions. The psychotic symptoms tend to match the person’s extreme mood. For example, someone having psychotic symptoms during a depressive episode may falsely believe they are financially ruined, while someone having psychotic symptoms during a manic episode may falsely believe they are famous or have special powers.

Looking at symptoms over the course of the illness and the person’s family history can help determine whether a person has bipolar disorder along with another disorder.

How is bipolar disorder treated?
Treatment helps many people, even those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder. Mental health professionals treat bipolar disorder with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of treatments.

Medications
Certain medications can help control the symptoms of bipolar disorder. Some people may need to try several different medications before finding the ones that work best. The most common types of medications that doctors prescribe include mood stabilizers and atypical antipsychotics. Mood stabilizers such as lithium or valproate can help prevent mood episodes or reduce their severity. Lithium also can decrease the risk of suicide. While bipolar depression is often treated with antidepressant medication, a mood stabilizer must be taken as well, as an antidepressant alone can trigger a manic episode or rapid cycling in a person with bipolar disorder. Medications that target sleep or anxiety are sometimes added to mood stabilizers as part of a treatment plan.

Talk with your health care provider to understand the risks and benefits of each medication. Report any concerns about side effects to your health care provider right away. Avoid stopping medication without talking to your health care provider first. Read the latest medication warnings, patient medication guides, and information on newly approved medications on the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website .

Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) is a term for various treatment techniques that aim to help a person identify and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. Psychotherapy can offer support, education, skills, and strategies to people with bipolar disorder and their families.

Some types of psychotherapy can be effective treatments for bipolar disorder when used with medications, including interpersonal and social rhythm therapy, which aims to understand and work with an individual’s biological and social rhythms. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is an important treatment for depression, and CBT adapted for the treatment of insomnia can be especially helpful as a component of the treatment of bipolar depression. Learn more on NIMH’s psychotherapies webpage.

Other Treatments
Some people may find other treatments helpful in managing their bipolar disorder symptoms.

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a brain stimulation procedure that can help relieve severe symptoms of bipolar disorder. ECT is usually only considered if an individual’s illness has not improved after other treatments such as medication or psychotherapy, or in cases that require rapid response, such as with suicide risk or catatonia (a state of unresponsiveness).
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) is a type of brain stimulation that uses magnetic waves, rather than the electrical stimulus of ECT, to relieve depression over a series of treatment sessions. Although not as powerful as ECT, TMS does not require general anesthesia and presents little risk of memory or adverse cognitive effects.
Light Therapy is the best evidence-based treatment for seasonal affective disorder (SAD), and many people with bipolar disorder experience seasonal worsening of depression in the winter, in some cases to the point of SAD. Light therapy could also be considered for lesser forms of seasonal worsening of bipolar depression.
Complementary Health Approaches
Unlike specific psychotherapy and medication treatments that are scientifically proven to improve bipolar disorder symptoms, complementary health approaches for bipolar disorder, such as natural products, are not based on current knowledge or evidence. For more information, visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health website .

Coping With Bipolar Disorder
Living with bipolar disorder can be challenging, but there are ways to help yourself, as well as your friends and loved ones.

Get treatment and stick with it. Treatment is the best way to start feeling better.
Keep medical and therapy appointments and talk with your health care provider about treatment options.
Take medication as directed.
Structure activities. Keep a routine for eating, sleeping, and exercising.
Try regular, vigorous exercise like jogging, swimming, or bicycling, which can help with depression and anxiety, promote better sleep, and is healthy for your heart and brain.
Keep a life chart to help recognize your mood swings.
Ask for help when trying to stick with your treatment.
Be patient. Improvement takes time. Social support helps.
Remember, bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness, but long-term, ongoing treatment can help manage symptoms and enable you to live a healthy life.

Are there clinical trials studying bipolar disorder?
NIMH supports a wide range of research, including clinical trials that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions—including bipolar disorder. Although individuals may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge to help others in the future. Researchers at NIMH and around the country conduct clinical trials with patients and healthy volunteers. Talk to a health care provider about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you. For more information, visit the NIMH clinical trials webpage.

Finding Help
Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator
This online resource, provided by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), can help you locate mental health treatment facilities and programs. Find a facility in your state by searching SAMHSA’s online Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator . For additional resources, visit NIMH's Help for Mental Illnesses webpage.

If you or someone you know is in immediate distress or is thinking about hurting themselves, call or text the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline  at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org. You can also contact the Crisis Text Line  (text HELLO to 741741). For medical emergencies, call 911.

Talking to a Health Care Provider About Your Mental Health
Communicating well with a health care provider can improve your care and help you both make good choices about your health. Find tips to help prepare for and get the most out of your visit. For additional resources, including questions to ask a provider, visit the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality website .
Bipolar Disorder
En Español
Top of body
Bipolar disorder is a serious mental illness that causes unusual shifts in mood, ranging from extreme highs (mania or “manic” episodes) to lows (depression or “depressive” episode).

A person who has bipolar disorder also experiences changes in their energy, thinking, behavior, and sleep. During bipolar mood episodes, it is difficult to carry out day-to-day tasks, go to work or school, and maintain relationships.

What Causes Bipolar Disorder?
Bipolar disorder affects millions of adults in the U.S. Most people are diagnosed with bipolar disorder in their teens or twenties, however, it can occur at any age and although the symptoms can persist, many find ways to manage their symptoms successfully. People are at a higher risk if they have a family history of bipolar disorder, experienced a traumatic event, and/or misused drugs or alcohol. Differences in brain structure and function may also play a role. If you think you may have it, tell your health care provider.

Signs and Symptoms of Bipolar Disorder
When a person has a manic episode, they feel overly excited, productive, and even invincible. On the other hand, when a person has a depressive episode, they feel extremely sad, hopeless, and tired. They may avoid friends, family, and participating in their usual activities. A severe manic or depressive episode may trigger psychotic symptoms, such as delusions (false beliefs) or hallucinations (seeing or hearing things that others do not see or hear). These drastic behavior changes usually cause concern among friends and family. Everyone’s experience with bipolar disorder is different, and the signs and symptoms vary:

A "manic" episode may include
A "manic" episode may include:

Intense feelings of euphoria, excitement, or happiness
Appearing abnormally jumpy or wired
Having excessive energy
Insomnia or restlessness (a decreased need for sleep)
Speaking fast or being unusually talkative
Having racing or jumbled thoughts
Distractibility
Inflated self-esteem
Doing impulsive, uncharacteristic, or risky things like having unsafe sex or spending a lot of money
Increased agitation and irritability
Hypomania
A "depressive" episode may include
A "depressive" episode may include:

Feeling down, sad, worried, worthless, anxious, guilty, empty, or hopeless
Lack of interest, or no interest, in activities
Feeling tired, low energy
Forgetfulness
Indecisiveness
Difficulty concentrating
Changes in sleep, either sleeping too much or too little
Changes in appetite, either eating too much or too little
Thoughts of death and/or suicide
Types & Treatment Bipolar Disorder
Types of Bipolar Disorder
Each type of bipolar disorder includes periods between manic or depressive episodes when symptoms lessen, or people feel stable. The major difference between the types of disorder is how extreme the mood states are and how long they last.

Bipolar I Disorder: having a history of at least one manic episode, but sometimes also having depressed or hypomanic episodes as well.
Bipolar II Disorder: mood states that vary from an even mood to high to low, but the highs are less extreme and are called hypomanic states. The depressive episodes may be just as severe as those in Major Depressive Disorder and/or Bipolar I Disorder.
Cyclothymic Disorder: more chronic mood instability (both highs and lows) that are not as long, severe, or frequent as those experienced in bipolar I or II disorder.
Treatment for Bipolar Disorder
Bipolar disorder is a lifelong condition that doesn’t go away on its own. While it can feel overwhelming and isolating at first, an early, accurate diagnosis is the first step toward getting better. Proper treatment, along with support and self-care, helps people with bipolar disorder live healthy, fulfilling lives.

If you think you may have bipolar disorder, tell your health care provider. A medical checkup can rule out other illnesses that might cause your mood changes.

Bipolar disorder is treatable with a combination of medication and therapy.

Medications. Mood stabilizers, antipsychotics, and antidepressants can help manage mood swings and other symptoms. It is important to understand the benefits and risks of medications. People may need to try different medications before determining which works best for them. They should never stop taking a medication without their doctor’s guidance.
“Talk therapy” (psychotherapy). Therapy helps people accept their disorder, recognize the warning signs of a manic or depressive episode, develop coping skills for handling stress, and stick with a medication schedule. Therapy also improves communication and relationships among families.
Long-term, continuous treatment. While there may be times between episodes where a person feels fine, a long-term, continuous treatment plan can reduce the severity and frequency of mood swings.
These healthy lifestyle habits, along with professional treatment, can help manage the symptoms of bipolar disorder:

Keep a consistent sleeping schedule. Go to sleep and wake up at the same time each day. Being sleep deprived can put people at risk for manic or depressive episodes. Sleeping more than usual may be a sign of a depressive episode. Limit caffeine, which can disrupt sleep.
Eat well and get regular exercise. A healthy diet will give your body proper nutrition, and exercise may help improve your mood.
Always take your medicine as prescribed. You should do this even when your mood is stable.
Check with your doctor before taking over-the-counter supplements or any medications prescribed by another doctor.
Keep a mood journal. By tracking how you feel day-to-day, you can notice triggers, monitor how your treatment is working, and spot changes in your eating or sleeping patterns. This written information can be especially helpful to your doctor if your medication needs to be adjusted.
Keep your primary care physician updated. They are an important part of the long-term management of bipolar disorder, even if you also see a psychiatrist.
Avoid using alcohol and other drugs.
Minimize stress. Simplify your life when possible. Try relaxation activities, like meditation or yoga.
Maintain a support network, of family and friends there to help during a crisis. Educate your loved ones about bipolar disorder so they can best support you. Ask them to help you recognize the warning signs of manic or depressive episodes.
Mental Health Screening
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook Twitter Pinterest
What is a mental health screening?
A mental health screening is a standard set of questions that a person answers to help a health care provider check for signs of a mental disorder. The questions help the provider learn about a person's mood, thinking, behavior, and memory.

A mental health screening is a way to catch mental health conditions early. If the screening shows signs of a disorder, more testing is usually needed to diagnose a specific mental disorder. Mental disorders are also called mental illnesses, and a mental health screening may be called a "mental illness test" or a "psychology test."

More than half of all Americans will have a mental disorder at some point in their lives. Their symptoms may range from mild to severe. Common mental disorders include:

Mood disorders, which include depression, bipolar disorder, seasonal affective disorder (SAD), and self-harm.
Anxiety disorders, which include panic disorder, phobias, and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Anxiety is a common disorder in children.
Eating disorders, which include anorexia and bulimia.
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). ADHD is one of the most common mental health disorders in children. It can also continue into adulthood.
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Personality disorders.
Substance use disorders, which include alcohol use disorder and drug use and addiction.
Psychotic disorders, which include schizophrenia.
These and other mental disorders affect people of all ages, including children. So, there are special mental health screening tests designed for children, teenagers, and older adults. Some screening tests look for general signs of the most common mental disorders. Other screening tests look for signs related to specific types of disorders.

Mental health screening can be an important part of your total health at every stage of life. Mental health symptoms can be a sign of certain physical conditions. And certain mental disorders can increase the risk of developing physical health problems. With proper mental health screening, diagnosis, and treatment, people with mental health disorders can get better and many recover completely.

Other names: mental health assessment, mental illness test, psychological evaluation, psychology test, psychiatric evaluation

What is it used for?
A mental health screening is usually used as the first step to find out if a person has signs of a mental disorder. It may be part of a routine checkup. A screening test is used to see whether a person:

Has a risk for developing a mental disorder
Needs more testing to diagnose or rule out a mental health disorder
Needs mental health care right away, before diagnostic testing can be finished
Mental health screening may also be used to see if treatment for a mental disorder is working.

A primary care provider may use mental health screening to help decide if a person needs to see a mental health provider for testing and/or treatment. A mental health provider is a health care professional who specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health problems. A mental health provider may use the results of a screening test to choose which other tests are needed to diagnose or rule out a specific mental disorder.

Why do I need a mental health screening?
You or your child may need a mental health screening if you have symptoms of a mental disorder. Different disorders have specific symptoms.

General symptoms of mental disorders may include:

Eating or sleeping too much or too little
Pulling away from people and usual activities
Fatigue and lack of energy
Feeling helpless, hopeless, or numb like nothing matters
Smoking, drinking, or using drugs more than usual
Feeling unusually confused, forgetful, nervous, angry, worried, or scared
Severe mood swings that cause problems in relationships
Thoughts and memories that you can't get out of your head
Hearing voices or believing things that aren't true
Thinking about death, suicide or harming yourself or others
Signs of mental disorders in children may also include:

Frequent tantrums and other behavior problems
Frequent stomachaches or headaches without a known medical cause
Difficulty in school
Repeating actions or constantly checking things out of fear that something bad will happen
Talking a lot about fears, worries, death, or suicide
If you or someone you know needs immediate help for a mental health disorder:

Call 911 or go to your local emergency room
Contact a crisis hotline. In the United States, you can reach the National Suicide and Crisis Lifeline at any time:
Call or text 988
Chat online with Lifeline Chat
TTY users: Use your preferred relay service or dial 711 then 988
Veterans can contact the Veterans Crisis Line:
Call 988 then press 1
Text 838255
Chat online
Call your mental health provider or other provider
Reach out to a loved one or close friend
What happens during a mental health screening?
If you are having a mental health screening, you'll answer a set of questions about your symptoms. The questions will be about your feelings, mood, sleep, appetite, and other parts of your life. A provider may ask you the questions or you may fill out a questionnaire and discuss your answers afterwards. It's important that your answers are honest and complete.

If your primary care provider is doing the screening, you may also have a physical exam and blood tests. There are no medical tests that can diagnose mental health disorders. But certain blood tests can show if a physical condition, such as thyroid disease or an electrolyte imbalance, is causing mental health symptoms.

During a blood test, a health care professional will take a blood sample from a vein in your arm, using a small needle. After the needle is inserted, a small amount of blood will be collected into a test tube or vial. You may feel a little sting when the needle goes in or out. This usually takes less than five minutes.

If your provider thinks your symptoms could be caused by physical problems with your brain or nerves, you may have a neurological exam or imaging tests of your brain.

If your child is having a mental health screening, the test will be geared to your child's age and abilities. You may be asked to fill out a questionnaire about your child's behavior.

The screening may be done by your child's primary care provider or a mental health provider who works with children and teenagers. Your child's provider may also order medical tests to look for physical causes of mental disorders. Some schools provide mental health screening services.

Will I need to do anything to prepare for a mental health screening?
You usually don't need any special preparations for a mental health screening. If your child is having a screening, you may be asked to keep notes on your child's behavior for a few days before the test.

Are there any risks to screening?
There is no risk to having a physical exam or taking a questionnaire.

There is very little risk to having a blood test. You may have slight pain or bruising at the spot where the needle was put in, but most symptoms go away quickly.

What do the results mean?
Usually, the provider who did the screening will explain the results. If the results show signs of a mental health disorder, the next steps depend on the type of disorder and how serious it may be. If a primary care provider did the screening, the provider may:

Talk with you about treatments
Order tests to check for other health problems that may be causing symptoms
Refer you or your child to a mental health provider
A mental health provider may do more tests to confirm a diagnosis and help develop a treatment plan. Starting treatment as soon as possible may improve the chance of recovery.

Learn more about laboratory tests, reference ranges, and understanding results.

Is there anything else I need to know about a mental health screening?
There are many types of mental health providers who treat mental disorders. Your or your child's primary health care provider or school can help you find the right support.

These are some of the providers who have training to treat mental health disorders:

Psychiatrists are medical doctors who specialize in mental health. Psychiatrists can prescribe medicine.
Psychologists generally have doctoral degrees, but they do not have medical degrees. They can't prescribe medicine unless they have a special license. Some psychologists work with providers who can prescribe medicine. Psychologists may use one-on-one counseling and/or group therapy sessions.
Psychiatric-mental health nurses are nurses with special training in mental health problems. Nurses who may have a master's or doctoral degree in psychiatric-mental health nursing include, advanced practice registered nurses (APRNs), certified nurse practitioners (CNPs), and clinical nurse specialists (CNSs). In some states, certain nurses can prescribe medicines.
Licensed clinical social workers have at least a master's degree in social work with special training in mental health. They can't prescribe medicine, but may work with providers who can prescribe medicine. Providers who are licensed clinical social workers usually have LCSW or LICSW after their names.
Licensed professional counselors (LPC) may also be called clinicians or therapists. States have different names of these licenses, such as LMFT (licensed marriage and family therapist). These professionals usually have a master's degree in a field related to mental health. They can't prescribe medicine but may work with providers who can prescribe.
Treatment for bipolar disorder, formerly called manic-depression, generally involves medications and forms of psychotherapy — whether you have bipolar I or bipolar II. Bipolar II disorder is not a milder form of bipolar I disorder, but a separate diagnosis.

While the manic episodes of bipolar I disorder can be severe and dangerous, individuals with bipolar II disorder can be depressed for longer periods, which can cause significant impairment with substantial consequences.

The types and doses of medications prescribed are based on your particular symptoms. Whether you have bipolar I or II, medications may include:

Mood stabilizers. You'll typically need mood-stabilizing medication to control episodes of mania or hypomania, which is a less severe form of mania. Examples of mood stabilizers include lithium (Lithobid), valproic acid (Depakene), divalproex sodium (Depakote), carbamazepine (Tegretol, Equetro, others) and lamotrigine (Lamictal).
Antipsychotics. Your psychiatric care provider may add an antipsychotic medication such as olanzapine (Zyprexa), risperidone (Risperdal), quetiapine (Seroquel), aripiprazole (Abilify), ziprasidone (Geodon), lurasidone (Latuda), cariprazine (Vraylar) or asenapine (Saphris). Your provider may prescribe some of these medications alone or along with a mood stabilizer.
Antidepressants. Your provider may add an antidepressant or one of the other medications used to treat bipolar disorder that has antidepressant effects to help manage depression. Because an antidepressant can sometimes trigger a manic episode, it needs to be prescribed along with a mood stabilizer or antipsychotic in bipolar disorder.
Antidepressant-antipsychotic. The medication Symbyax combines the antidepressant fluoxetine and the antipsychotic olanzapine. It works as a depression treatment and a mood stabilizer. Symbyax is approved by the Food and Drug Administration specifically for the treatment of depressive episodes associated with bipolar I disorder.
In addition to medication for bipolar disorder, other treatment approaches include:

Psychotherapy. As a key part of treatment, your psychiatric care provider may recommend cognitive behavioral therapy to identify unhealthy, negative beliefs and behaviors and replace them with healthy, positive ones. Other types of therapy also may help, such as social rhythm therapy — establishing a consistent routine for better mood management.
Substance abuse treatment. Many people with bipolar disorder also have alcohol, tobacco or drug problems. Drugs or alcohol may seem to ease symptoms, but they can actually trigger, prolong or worsen depression or mania. If you have a problem with alcohol or other drugs, tell your provider so that both your substance use and bipolar disorder can be treated.
Treatment programs. Participation in an outpatient treatment program for bipolar disorder can be very beneficial. However, your provider may recommend hospitalization if your bipolar disorder significantly affects your functioning or safety.
Self-management strategies. In addition to medications and other types of treatment, successful management of your bipolar disorder includes living a healthy lifestyle, such as getting enough sleep, eating a healthy diet and being physically active. Keeping to a regular schedule, getting involved in social activities and joining a support group may also help. If you need advice in these areas, talk with your provider.
You may need to try different medications or combinations of medications to determine what works best. So it's important to regularly meet with your psychiatric care provider to see how well your treatment is working. If necessary, your provider may make periodic adjustments to your medication to keep symptoms and side effects under control.

What Is Bipolar Disorder?
Bipolar disorder causes extreme ups and downs in a person’s mood and energy. People have low-energy moods of depression and high-energy moods called mania (also called manic moods).

Just about everyone goes through ups and downs in their moods. Most of the time, mood changes do not mean a person has bipolar disorder.
But mood changes could be a sign of bipolar if they:
are extreme
include depressed moods and manic moods
have extreme effects on a person's energy, thinking, and behavior
cause big problems in a person’s daily life
If you’re worried about your moods, talk with your parent, doctor, or a mental health provider.

What to Do

How Does Bipolar Disorder Affect People?
At times, people with bipolar disorder go through depression. Other times, they go through manic moods. They may have normal moods in between.

When they go through depression, people with bipolar will:
have a sad or irritable mood that lasts for at least 2 weeks
Added to that, they may:

feel hopeless or worthless
feel tired, lack energy, or not get things done
have trouble concentrating
have trouble sleeping or sleep more
eat less or eat more
not enjoy things as before
pull away from others
have thoughts of self-harm, suicide, or wanting to die
When they go through a manic mood, people with bipolar will:

have a high-energy mood that lasts for 4-7 days
During this time, they will think and act in ways that are extreme for them. For example, they may:

have racing thoughts
speak fast, talk nonstop, or skip from topic to topic
have extreme energy, be hyperactive, or rush through things
stay awake for days, not seem to need sleep
act overly silly or overly happy
be reckless, take unsafe risks
lash out in anger
use poor judgment, do things they shouldn’t do
try risky behaviors
think of themselves in inflated ways or think they have superpowers
Going through these two types of extreme moods is hard on a person. Bipolar moods can make it harder to get along well with others. It can be a challenge to succeed at goals.

Bipolar can cloud people’s judgment and lead them to take unsafe risks. It can cause problems they didn’t expect and didn’t intend. Some people might be more likely to self-harm or try suicide. They may drink alcohol or use drugs.
That’s why it matters to get the right diagnosis and treatment for bipolar moods. It can help reverse or prevent problems like these.
Moods don’t have to run a person’s life. With treatment, people with bipolar can learn to manage their moods and symptoms. This helps them feel and do better in things that matter to them.
How Do Doctors Diagnose Bipolar Disorder?
There’s no blood test or medical test for bipolar disorder. To diagnose bipolar, a mental health doctor meets with you. They ask questions about your moods, thoughts, feelings, and health. They ask about how you’re doing in your life and problems you’re having. They listen and talk with you, and with your parent. They also check for other conditions that can cause mood symptoms. This can take a few visits.

If a doctor finds that you have bipolar, they will talk more about it with you. They will explain the treatment plan that can help you.
What Is the Treatment for Bipolar?
Treatment for bipolar includes medicines and talk therapy. Medicine can help keep moods stable. But by itself, medicine isn’t enough. A person with bipolar needs talk therapy, too.

Each person’s treatment is tailored to what they need. A type of talk therapy called DBT (dialectical behavior therapy) helps most people. In this therapy, people can learn skills to manage moods. For example, they can learn to:
become more mindful (and aware) of their emotions and thoughts
manage their emotions (instead of dwelling on painful emotions or trying to get rid of them)
cope with strong emotions in healthy ways
set up and follow routines that help keep moods stable
be patient and kind to themselves
care for themselves in positive ways
get along better with others
With time and practice, these skills can become part of a person’s daily life.

Therapy also includes making goals and working out ways to move toward them. In therapy, people track their progress. Many find strengths they didn’t know they had.

When possible, parents take part in treatment. This helps them understand bipolar moods and how to best respond. It can help families have less conflict, relate better, and feel closer.
What Causes Bipolar Disorder?
There is no single cause for bipolar disorder. Experts think that a mix of genes and stressful life events may lead to bipolar disorder.

Genes and a family history of bipolar make it more likely for a person to develop it. But not everyone with a family history of bipolar will develop the condition. Going through very stressful life events may increase the chances for some people who have the genes for bipolar.
If you think you have bipolar disorder, start by talking to a parent or other adult. Ask them to set up a visit with your doctor or a mental health provider. Getting the right treatment matters. Find mental health providers to support you and help you learn all you can.
Bipolar Disorder in Children and Teens
Bipolar Disorder in Children and Teens cover image
Download PDF
Order a free hardcopy
En español
Does your child go through extreme changes in mood and behavior? Does your child get much more excited or much more irritable than other kids? Do you notice that your child goes through cycles of extreme highs and lows in mood and energy levels more often than other children? Do these mood changes affect how your child acts at school or home?

Some children and teens with these symptoms may have bipolar disorder, a mental illness that causes unusual shifts in mood, energy, activity levels, and day-to-day functioning. With treatment, children and teens with bipolar disorder can improve over time.

What is bipolar disorder?
Bipolar disorder (formerly called manic-depressive illness or manic depression) is a mental illness that causes people to experience noticeable, sometimes extreme, changes in mood and behavior. It is a common misperception that children cannot have bipolar disorder. Although most people are diagnosed with bipolar disorder in adolescence or adulthood, the symptoms can appear earlier in childhood.

Bipolar disorder is not the same as the typical ups and downs every child goes through. The mood changes in bipolar disorder are more extreme, often unprovoked, and accompanied by changes in sleep, energy level, and the ability to think clearly.

Children with bipolar disorder sometimes feel very happy or “up” and are much more energetic and active than usual. This is called a manic episode. Children with bipolar disorder sometimes feel very sad or “down” and are much less active than usual. This is called a depressive episode. Bipolar disorder is often episodic, but it usually lasts a lifetime.

Bipolar disorder symptoms can make it hard to perform well in school or get along with friends and family members. Some children and teens with bipolar disorder may try to hurt themselves or attempt suicide. Early diagnosis and treatment can lead to better functioning and well-being over the long term.

Signs and symptoms of bipolar disorder may overlap with symptoms of other disorders that are common in young people, such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), conduct problems, major depression, and anxiety disorders.

Diagnosing bipolar disorder can be complicated and requires a careful and thorough evaluation by a trained, experienced mental health professional.

With treatment, children and teens with bipolar disorder can manage their symptoms and lead full, active lives.

What causes bipolar disorder?
The exact causes of bipolar disorder are unknown, but several factors may contribute to the illness.

For example, researchers are beginning to uncover genetic factors linked to bipolar disorder and other mental illnesses. Research shows that a person’s chances of having bipolar disorder are higher if they have a close family member with the illness, which may be because they have the same genetic variations. However, just because one family member has bipolar disorder does not mean other family members will have it. Many genes are involved in the disorder, and no single gene causes it.

Research also suggests that people with a genetic risk of having bipolar disorder may be more likely to develop the disorder after experiencing trauma or other stressful life events.

Some research studies have found differences in brain structure and function between people with bipolar disorder and people without it. Researchers are examining these differences to learn more about possible causes and effective treatments.

What are the symptoms of bipolar disorder?
Mood episodes in bipolar disorder include intense emotions and significant changes in sleep habits, activity levels, thoughts, or behaviors. Children and teens with bipolar disorder may have manic episodes, depressive episodes, or “mixed” episodes. A mixed episode has both manic and depressive symptoms. These mood episodes cause symptoms that often last for several days or weeks. During an episode, symptoms occur every day and last for most of the day.

These mood and activity changes are very different from the child’s usual behavior and the behavior of healthy children and teens.

Children and teens having a manic episode may:

Show intense happiness or silliness for long periods of time.
Have a very short temper or seem extremely irritable.
Talk fast about a lot of different things.
Have trouble sleeping but do not feel tired.
Have trouble staying focused and experience racing thoughts.
Seem overly interested or involved in pleasurable but risky activities.
Do risky or reckless things that show poor judgment.
Have an inflated sense of ability, knowledge, and power.
Children and teens having a depressive episode may:

Feel frequent and unprovoked sadness.
Show increased irritability, anger, or hostility.
Complain a lot about physical pain, such as stomachaches and headaches.
Start sleeping a lot more.
Have difficulty concentrating.
Feel hopeless and worthless.
Have difficulty communicating or maintaining relationships.
Eat too much or too little.
Have low energy and no interest in activities they usually enjoy.
Think about death or have thoughts of suicide.
Can children and teens with bipolar disorder have other problems?
Young people with bipolar disorder can have several problems at the same time. For example, they may also be at risk of misusing alcohol or drugs. Sometimes extreme behaviors go along with mood episodes. During manic episodes, young people with bipolar disorder may take extreme risks that they wouldn’t usually take or that could cause them harm or injury. During depressive episodes, some young people with bipolar disorder may think about running away from home or have thoughts of suicide.

If your child shows signs of suicidal thinking, take these signs seriously and call your child’s health care provider.

If your child is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline  at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org . This service is confidential, free, and available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

How is bipolar disorder diagnosed?
A health care provider will ask questions about your child’s mood, sleeping patterns, energy levels, and behavior. There are no blood tests or brain scans that can diagnose bipolar disorder. However, the health care provider may use tests to determine if something other than bipolar disorder is causing your child’s symptoms. Health care providers may need to know about medical conditions in the family, such as depression or substance use.

Other disorders—such as ADHD, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, conduct disorder, and anxiety disorders—have symptoms like those of bipolar disorder. It can be challenging to distinguish bipolar disorder from depression that occurs without mania, referred to as “major depression.” A health care provider who specializes in working with children and teens can carefully evaluate your child’s symptoms to provide an accurate diagnosis.

How is bipolar disorder treated?
Children and teens can work with their health care provider to develop a treatment plan to help them manage their symptoms and improve their quality of life. It is important to follow the treatment plan, even when your child is not currently experiencing a mood episode. Steady, dependable treatment works better than treatment that starts and stops.

Several types of medication can help treat symptoms of bipolar disorder. Children respond to medications in different ways. They may need to try different types of medication to find the one that works best for them. Some children may need more than one type of medication because their symptoms are complex. Health care providers usually try to prescribe the fewest number of medications and the smallest doses possible to help treat a child’s symptoms. Always tell your child’s health care provider about any medication side effects. Do not stop giving your child a prescribed medication without speaking to a health care provider. Stopping medication suddenly can be dangerous and can make symptoms worse.

Different kinds of psychosocial therapy can also help children and their families manage the symptoms of bipolar disorder. Therapies based on scientific research—including cognitive behavioral approaches and family-focused therapy—can provide support, education, and guidance to youth and their families. These therapies teach skills that can help people manage bipolar disorder, including skills for maintaining routines, enhancing emotion regulation, and improving social interactions.

What can children and teens expect from treatment?
With treatment, daily functioning and well-being can improve over time. Treatment is more effective when health care providers, caregivers, and young people work together.

Sometimes a child’s symptoms may change or disappear and then come back. When this happens, your child’s health care provider may recommend changes to the treatment plan. Treatment can take time but sticking with the treatment plan can help young people manage their symptoms and reduce the likelihood of future episodes.

Your child’s health care provider may recommend keeping a daily life chart or mood chart to track your child’s moods, behaviors, and sleep patterns. This may make it easier to track the illness and see whether treatment is working.

How can I help my child or teen?
Help begins with an accurate diagnosis and treatment. Talk to your child’s health care provider about any symptoms you notice.

If your child has bipolar disorder, here are some basic things you can do:

Be patient.
Encourage your child to talk, and listen to your child carefully.
Pay attention to your child’s moods, and be alert to any major changes.
Understand triggers and learn strategies for managing intense emotions and irritability.
Help your child have fun.
Remember that treatment takes time: Sticking with the treatment plan can help your child get better and stay better.
Help your child understand that treatment can make life better.
How does bipolar disorder affect caregivers and families?
Caring for a child or teenager with bipolar disorder can be stressful for parents and families. Coping with a child’s mood episodes and other symptoms—such as short tempers and risky behaviors—can challenge any caregiver.

It is important that caregivers take care of themselves, too. Find someone you can talk to or consult your health care provider about support groups. Finding support and strategies for managing stress can help you and your child.

Where do I go for help?
If you’re unsure of where to get help, your doctor, pediatrician, or other family health care provider is a good place to start. A health care provider can refer you to a qualified mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, who has experience treating bipolar disorder and can evaluate your child’s symptoms.

Learn more about getting help on the NIMH website. The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration has an online treatment locator  to help you find mental health services in your area.

If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline  at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org . In life-threatening situations, call 911.

What should I know about clinical trials?
NIMH supports a wide range of research, including clinical trials that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions—including bipolar disorder. Although individuals may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.

Researchers at NIMH and around the country conduct clinical trials with patients and healthy volunteers. Talk to a health care provider about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you. Learn more about participating in clinical trials.
Bipolar Disorder in Teens and Young Adults: Know the Signs
Bipolar Disorder in Teens and Young Adults: Know the Signs
Download PDF
En español
Bipolar disorder is a mental illness that causes unusual and extreme shifts in mood, marked by episodes of mania and depression. During these episodes, symptoms last for days or weeks at a time.

Common signs & symptoms of mania
Showing intense happiness or silliness
Having a very short temper or seeming extremely irritable
Talking very fast or having racing thoughts
Having an inflated sense of ability, knowledge, and power
Doing reckless things that show poor judgment
Common signs & symptoms of depression
Feeling very sad or hopeless
Feeling lonely or isolating from others
Eating too much or too little
Having little energy and no interest in usual activities
Sleeping too much
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, help is available. For crisis counseling and support, call or text 988 (988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline ). In life-threatening situations, call 911.

Bipolar Disorder
Overview
Bipolar disorder (formerly called manic-depressive illness or manic depression) is a mental illness that causes unusual shifts in a person’s mood, energy, activity levels, and concentration. These shifts can make it difficult to carry out day-to-day tasks.

There are three types of bipolar disorder. All three types involve clear changes in mood, energy, and activity levels. These moods range from periods of extremely “up,” elated, irritable, or energized behavior (known as manic episodes) to very “down,” sad, indifferent, or hopeless periods (known as depressive episodes). Less severe manic periods are known as hypomanic episodes.

Bipolar I disorder is defined by manic episodes that last for at least 7 days (nearly every day for most of the day) or by manic symptoms that are so severe that the person needs immediate medical care. Usually, depressive episodes occur as well, typically lasting at least 2 weeks. Episodes of depression with mixed features (having depressive symptoms and manic symptoms at the same time) are also possible. Experiencing four or more episodes of mania or depression within 1 year is called “rapid cycling.”
Bipolar II disorder is defined by a pattern of depressive episodes and hypomanic episodes. The hypomanic episodes are less severe than the manic episodes in bipolar I disorder.
Cyclothymic disorder (also called cyclothymia) is defined by recurring hypomanic and depressive symptoms that are not intense enough or do not last long enough to qualify as hypomanic or depressive episodes.
Sometimes a person might experience symptoms of bipolar disorder that do not match the three categories listed above, and this is referred to as “other specified and unspecified bipolar and related disorders.”

Bipolar disorder is often diagnosed during late adolescence (teen years) or early adulthood. Sometimes, bipolar symptoms can appear in children. Although the symptoms may vary over time, bipolar disorder usually requires lifelong treatment. Following a prescribed treatment plan can help people manage their symptoms and improve their quality of life.

Signs and symptoms
People with bipolar disorder experience periods of unusually intense emotion and changes in sleep patterns and activity levels, and engage in behaviors that are out of character for them—often without recognizing their likely harmful or undesirable effects. These distinct periods are called mood episodes. Mood episodes are very different from the person’s usual moods and behaviors. During an episode, the symptoms last every day for most of the day. Episodes may also last for longer periods, such as several days or weeks.

Symptoms of a Manic Episode

Symptoms of a Depressive Episode

Feeling very up, high, elated, or extremely irritable or touchy

Feeling very down or sad, or anxious

Feeling jumpy or wired, more active than usual

Feeling slowed down or restless

Having a decreased need for sleep

Having trouble falling asleep, waking up too early, or sleeping too much

Talking fast about a lot of different things (“flight of ideas”)

Talking very slowly, feeling unable to find anything to say, or forgetting a lot

Racing thoughts

Having trouble concentrating or making decisions

Feeling able to do many things at once without getting tired

Feeling unable to do even simple things

Having excessive appetite for food, drinking, sex, or other pleasurable activities

Having a lack of interest in almost all activities

Feeling unusually important, talented, or powerful

Feeling hopeless or worthless, or thinking about death or suicide

Sometimes people have both manic and depressive symptoms in the same episode, and this is called an episode with mixed features. During an episode with mixed features, people may feel very sad, empty, or hopeless while at the same time feeling extremely energized.

A person may have bipolar disorder even if their symptoms are less extreme. For example, some people with bipolar II disorder experience hypomania, a less severe form of mania. During a hypomanic episode, a person may feel very good, be able to get things done, and keep up with day-to-day life. The person may not feel that anything is wrong, but family and friends may recognize changes in mood or activity levels as possible symptoms of bipolar disorder. Without proper treatment, people with hypomania can develop severe mania or depression.

Diagnosis
Receiving the right diagnosis and treatment can help people with bipolar disorder lead healthy and active lives. Talking with a health care provider is the first step. The health care provider can complete a physical exam and other necessary medical tests to rule out other possible causes. The health care provider may then conduct a mental health evaluation or provide a referral to a trained mental health care provider, such as a psychiatrist, psychologist, or clinical social worker who has experience in diagnosing and treating bipolar disorder.

Mental health care providers usually diagnose bipolar disorder based on a person’s symptoms, lifetime history, experiences, and, in some cases, family history. Accurate diagnosis in youth is particularly important.

Find tips to help prepare for and get the most out of your visit with your health care provider.

Bipolar disorder and other conditions
Many people with bipolar disorder also have other mental disorders or conditions such as anxiety disorders, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), misuse of drugs or alcohol, or eating disorders. Sometimes people who have severe manic or depressive episodes also have symptoms of psychosis, which may include hallucinations or delusions. The psychotic symptoms tend to match the person’s extreme mood. For example, someone having psychotic symptoms during a depressive episode may falsely believe they are financially ruined, while someone having psychotic symptoms during a manic episode may falsely believe they are famous or have special powers.

Looking at a person’s symptoms over the course of the illness and examining their family history can help a health care provider determine whether the person has bipolar disorder along with another disorder.

Risk factors
Researchers are studying possible causes of bipolar disorder. Most agree that there are many factors that are likely to contribute to a person’s chance of having the disorder.

Brain structure and functioning: Some studies show that the brains of people with bipolar disorder differ in certain ways from the brains of people who do not have bipolar disorder or any other mental disorder. Learning more about these brain differences may help scientists understand bipolar disorder and determine which treatments will work best. At this time, health care providers base the diagnosis and treatment plan on a person’s symptoms and history, rather than brain imaging or other diagnostic tests.

Genetics: Some research suggests that people with certain genes are more likely to develop bipolar disorder. Research also shows that people who have a parent or sibling with bipolar disorder have an increased chance of having the disorder themselves. Many genes are involved, and no one gene causes the disorder. Learning more about how genes play a role in bipolar disorder may help researchers develop new treatments.

Treatments and therapies
Treatment can help many people, including those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder. An effective treatment plan usually includes a combination of medication and psychotherapy, also called talk therapy.

Bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness. Episodes of mania and depression typically come back over time. Between episodes, many people with bipolar disorder are free of mood changes, but some people may have lingering symptoms. Long-term, continuous treatment can help people manage these symptoms.

Medications
Certain medications can help manage symptoms of bipolar disorder. Some people may need to try different medications and work with their health care provider to find the medications that work best.

The most common types of medications that health care providers prescribe include mood stabilizers and atypical antipsychotics. Mood stabilizers such as lithium or valproate can help prevent mood episodes or reduce their severity. Lithium also can decrease the risk of suicide. Health care providers may include medications that target sleep or anxiety as part of the treatment plan.

Although bipolar depression is often treated with antidepressant medication, a mood stabilizer must be taken as well—taking an antidepressant without a mood stabilizer can trigger a manic episode or rapid cycling in a person with bipolar disorder.

Because people with bipolar disorder are more likely to seek help when they are depressed than when they are experiencing mania or hypomania, it is important for health care providers to take a careful medical history to ensure that bipolar disorder is not mistaken for depression.

People taking medication should:

Talk with their health care provider to understand the risks and benefits of the medication.
Tell their health care provider about any prescription drugs, over-the-counter medications, or supplements they are already taking.
Report any concerns about side effects to a health care provider right away. The health care provider may need to change the dose or try a different medication.
Remember that medication for bipolar disorder must be taken consistently, as prescribed, even when one is feeling well.
It is important to talk to a health care provider before stopping a prescribed medication. Stopping a medication suddenly may lead symptoms to worsen or come back. You can find basic information about medications on NIMH's medications webpage. Read the latest medication warnings, patient medication guides, and information on newly approved medications on the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website. 

Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy, also called talk therapy, can be an effective part of treatment for people with bipolar disorder. Psychotherapy is a term for treatment techniques that aim to help people identify and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. This type of therapy can provide support, education, and guidance to people with bipolar disorder and their families.

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is an important treatment for depression, and CBT adapted for the treatment of insomnia can be especially helpful as part of treatment for bipolar depression.

Treatment may also include newer therapies designed specifically for the treatment of bipolar disorder, including interpersonal and social rhythm therapy (IPSRT) and family-focused therapy.

Learn more about the various types of psychotherapies.

Other treatment options
Some people may find other treatments helpful in managing their bipolar symptoms:

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a brain stimulation procedure that can help relieve severe symptoms of bipolar disorder. Health care providers may consider ECT when a person’s illness has not improved after other treatments, or in cases that require rapid response, such as with people who have a high suicide risk or catatonia (a state of unresponsiveness).
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) is a type of brain stimulation that uses magnetic waves to relieve depression over a series of treatment sessions. Although not as powerful as ECT, rTMS does not require general anesthesia and has a low risk of negative effects on memory and thinking.
Light therapy is the best evidence-based treatment for seasonal affective disorder (SAD), and many people with bipolar disorder experience seasonal worsening of depression or SAD in the winter. Light therapy may also be used to treat lesser forms of seasonal worsening of bipolar depression.
Unlike specific psychotherapy and medication treatments that are scientifically proven to improve bipolar disorder symptoms, complementary health approaches for bipolar disorder, such as natural products, are not based on current knowledge or evidence. For more information, visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health website .

Finding treatment
A family health care provider is a good resource and can be the first stop in searching for help. Find tips to help prepare for and get the most out of your visit.
To find mental health treatment services in your area, call the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) National Helpline at 1-800-662-HELP (4357), visit the SAMHSA online treatment locator , or text your ZIP code to 435748.
Learn more about finding help on the NIMH website.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline  at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org . In life-threatening situations, call 911.

Coping with bipolar disorder
Living with bipolar disorder can be challenging, but there are ways to help make it easier.

Work with a health care provider to develop a treatment plan and stick with it. Treatment is the best way to start feeling better.
Follow the treatment plan as directed. Work with a health care provider to adjust the plan, as needed.
Structure your activities. Try to have a routine for eating, sleeping, and exercising.
Try regular, vigorous exercise like jogging, swimming, or bicycling, which can help with depression and anxiety, promote better sleep, and support your heart and brain health.
Track your moods, activities, and overall health and well-being to help recognize your mood swings.
Ask trusted friends and family members for help in keeping up with your treatment plan.
Be patient. Improvement takes time. Staying connected with sources of social support can help.
Long-term, ongoing treatment can help control symptoms and enable you to live a healthy life.
Bipolar disorder
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook Twitter Pinterest
Bipolar disorder is a mental condition in which a person has wide or extreme swings in their mood. Periods of feeling sad and depressed may alternate with periods of intense excitement and activity or being cross or irritable.

Bipolar disorder
Causes
Bipolar disorder affects men and women equally. It most often starts between ages 15 and 25. The exact cause is not known, but it occurs more often in relatives of people with bipolar disorder.

In most people with bipolar disorder, there is no clear cause for the periods (episodes) of extreme happiness and high activity or energy (mania) or depression and low activity or energy (depression). The following may trigger a manic episode:

Childbirth
Medicines, such as antidepressants or steroids
Periods of not being able to sleep (insomnia)
Recreational drug use
Symptoms
The manic phase may last from days to months. It may include these symptoms:

Easily distracted
Excess involvement in activities
Little need for sleep
Poor judgment
Poor temper control
Lack of self-control and reckless behavior, such as drinking or using drugs in excess, having increased and risky sex, gambling, and spending or giving away a lot of money
Very irritable mood, racing thoughts, talking a lot, and false beliefs about self or abilities
Rapid speech
Concerns about things that are not true (delusions)
The depressive episode may include these symptoms:

Daily low mood or sadness
Problems concentrating, remembering, or making decisions
Eating problems such as loss of appetite and weight loss or overeating and weight gain
Fatigue or lack of energy
Feelings of worthlessness, hopelessness, or guilt
Loss of pleasure in activities once enjoyed
Loss of self-esteem
Thoughts of death or suicide
Trouble getting to sleep or sleeping too much
Pulling away from friends or activities that were once enjoyed
People with bipolar disorder are at high risk for suicide. They may use alcohol or other substances. This can make the bipolar symptoms worse and increase the risk for suicide.

Episodes of depression are more common than episodes of mania. The pattern is not the same in all people with bipolar disorder:

Depression and mania symptoms may occur together. This is called a mixed state.
Symptoms may also occur right after each other. This is called rapid cycling.
Exams and Tests
To diagnose bipolar disorder, the health care provider may do some or all of the following:

Ask whether other family members have bipolar disorder
Ask about your recent mood swings and for how long you have had them
Perform a thorough exam and order lab tests to look for other illnesses that may be causing symptoms that resemble bipolar disorder
Talk to family members about your symptoms and overall health
Ask about any health problems you have and any medicines you take
Watch your behavior and mood
Treatment
The main goal of treatment is to:

Make the episodes less frequent and severe
Help you function well and enjoy your life at home and at work
Prevent self-injury and suicide
MEDICINES

Medicines are a key part of treating bipolar disorder. Most often, the first medicines used are called mood stabilizers. They help you avoid mood swings and extreme changes in activity and energy levels.

With medicines, you may begin to feel better. However, for some people, symptoms of mania may feel good. Some people have side effects from the medicines. As a result, you may be tempted to stop taking your medicines or change the way you are taking them. But stopping your medicines or taking them in the wrong way can cause symptoms to come back or become much worse. Do not stop taking or change the dosages of your medicines. Talk with your provider if you have questions about your medicines.

Ask family members or friends to help you take medicines the right way. This means taking the right dose at the right time. They can also help make sure that episodes of mania and depression are treated as soon as possible.

If mood stabilizers do not help, your provider may suggest other medicines, such as antipsychotics or antidepressants.

You will need regular visits with a psychiatrist to talk about your medicines and their possible side effects. Blood tests are often needed, too.

OTHER TREATMENTS

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may be used to treat the manic or depressive phase if it does not respond to medicine.

People who are in the middle of a severe manic or depressive episode may need to stay in a hospital until they are stable and their behavior is under control.

SUPPORT PROGRAMS AND TALK THERAPY

Joining a support group may help you and your loved ones. Involving family members and caregivers in your treatment may help reduce the chance of symptoms returning.

Important skills you may learn at such programs include how to:

Cope with symptoms that continue even while you are taking medicines
Get enough sleep and stay away from recreational drugs
Take medicines the right way and manage side effects
Watch for the return of symptoms, and know what to do when they return
Find out what triggers the episodes and avoid these triggers
Talk therapy with a mental health provider may be helpful for people with bipolar disorder.

Outlook (Prognosis)
Periods of depression or mania return in most people, even with treatment. People may also have issues with alcohol or drug use. They may also have problems with relationships, school, work, and finances.

Suicide is a very real risk during both mania and depression. People with bipolar disorder who think or talk about suicide need emergency attention right away.

When to Contact a Medical Professional
Seek help right way if you:

Have symptoms of mania
Feel the urge to hurt yourself or others
Feel hopeless, scared, or overwhelmed
See things that are not really there
Feel you cannot leave the house
Are not able to care for yourself
Call the treating provider if:

Symptoms are getting worse
You have side effects from medicines
You are not taking medicine the right way
Brain Stimulation Therapies
What are brain stimulation therapies?
Brain stimulation therapies can play an important role in treating mental disorders. These therapies act by activating or inhibiting the brain with electricity. The electricity can be given directly through electrodes implanted in the brain or indirectly through electrodes placed on the scalp. The electricity can also be induced by applying magnetic fields to the head.

This video from the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) provides an overview of brain stimulation therapies and how they can be used to treat mental disorders.


This page provides basic information about brain stimulation therapies. It does not cover all forms of therapy or all mental disorders for which a therapy might be used. The information should not be used as a guide for making medical decisions. Research is ongoing to determine the best use of these therapies and if they are effective treatments for other disorders and conditions.

The page is divided into therapies that are authorized by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat specific mental disorders, including depression, bipolar disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), versus therapies that are newer and still considered experimental.

The authorized therapies covered on this page are:

Electroconvulsive therapy
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
Vagus nerve stimulation
The experimental therapies covered on this page are:

Magnetic seizure therapy
Deep brain stimulation
Other brain stimulation therapies not discussed here may also hold promise for treating mental disorders. Information about these therapies is updated frequently. See the FDA website  for the latest information, warnings, and guidance on brain stimulation devices and announcements about new ones.

How do brain stimulation therapies work?
In most cases, brain stimulation therapy is used only after other treatments have been tried. Although brain stimulation therapies are less frequently used than medication or psychotherapy, they hold promise for people with certain mental disorders who have not responded to other treatments.

Brain stimulation therapies should be prescribed and monitored by a health care provider with specific training and expertise. A trained medical team performs the therapies. Most of the therapies involve using anesthesia to sedate the patient and a muscle relaxant to prevent them from moving. If so, an anesthesiologist will monitor breathing, heart rate, and blood pressure throughout the procedure.

A treatment plan involving brain stimulation therapy is based on a person's individual needs and medical situation. It usually also includes medication, psychotherapy, or both. Patients will likely be advised to continue these other treatments during and after therapy to maintain clinical improvement. Patients should not stop a treatment unless specifically advised by a health care provider.

Brain stimulation therapies treat serious mental illnesses. They are often used when a person with a serious mental illness is experiencing dangerous circumstances, such as not responding to the outside world or being at risk of harming themselves. If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline  at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org . In life-threatening situations, call 911.

Authorized therapies
The FDA determines whether foods, drugs, medical devices, and other products are safe to use. The FDA commonly gives two types of authorization to devices like brain stimulation therapies.

Approved means that the FDA has decided that the benefits of the device outweigh the known risks, as demonstrated by the results of clinical testing. Approval is usually required for devices that might have a significant risk of injury or illness, including devices implanted in the body.
Cleared means that the device is substantially equivalent to a similar device that the FDA has already cleared or approved. Clearance is usually given to lower-risk devices used outside of the body.
What is electroconvulsive therapy?
artist depiction of electroconvulsive therapy
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a noninvasive procedure that treats serious mental disorders by using an electric current to induce seizure activity in the brain. It has the longest history of use for depression and is one of the most widely used brain stimulation therapies.

ECT: Why it’s done
The FDA has cleared ECT to treat severe depressive episodes  in people aged 13 years and older with depression or bipolar disorder. In some cases, ECT has also been used to treat schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, and mania.

ECT is usually considered only if a person’s illness has not improved after trying other treatments like medication or psychotherapy. To be eligible for ECT, a person must have severe, treatment-resistant depression or require a rapid response due to life-threatening circumstances, such as being unable to move or respond to the outside world (e.g., is catatonic), being suicidal, or being malnourished.

ECT can be effective when medications have not worked, cannot be tolerated, or are undesirable due to physical illness, which is often the case in older adults. ECT also begins working more rapidly than antidepressant medications, usually taking effect within the first week of treatment.

ECT: How it works
Before a doctor performs ECT, the patient is sedated with a short-acting general anesthetic and given an intravenous muscle relaxant to prevent movement.

During the procedure:

Electrodes are placed at precise locations on the patient’s head.
An electric current is sent through the electrodes into the brain, causing seizure activity that lasts under a minute. Anesthesia ensures that the patient does not experience pain or feel the electrical pulses. Often, a blood pressure cuff is used on an arm or leg to block the muscle relaxant and allow movement of that limb to confirm that the seizure activity is adequate.
The patient awakens 5–10 minutes after the procedure ends. They may feel groggy at first as the anesthesia wears off, but after about an hour, they are usually alert and can resume normal activities.
A typical course of ECT is administered three times a week until a patient's symptoms improve (usually within 6–12 treatments). Frequently, a patient who undergoes ECT also takes antidepressant or mood-stabilizing medication.

Although ECT is effective in treating depressive episodes, follow-up treatment—either antidepressant medication or maintenance ECT —is usually required to sustain clinical improvement and reduce the chances that symptoms return. Maintenance ECT varies depending on the patient’s needs and may range from one session per week to one session every few months.

ECT: Side effects
The most common side effects associated with ECT include the following:

Headaches
Upset stomach
Muscle aches
Memory loss
Disorientation or confusion
Some patients may experience memory loss, especially of memories around the time of treatment. Sometimes the memory problems are more severe, but usually they improve over the days and weeks following the end of an ECT course.

Research has found that memory problems are more common  with the traditional form of ECT, known as bilateral ECT, in which electrodes are placed on both sides of the head. In comparison, unilateral ECT involves placing an electrode on only one side of the head, typically the right side, because it is opposite the brain's learning and memory areas, with another electrode placed on top of the head. Many doctors, patients, and families prefer unilateral ECT because it is less likely to cause memory problems.

Modern ECT devices can deliver electrical signals using brief or ultra-brief pulses. These short pulses are as effective as the traditional form of ECT but are given at a lower dose, helping further reduce cognitive side effects.

What is repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation?
artist depiction of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) is a noninvasive therapy that uses a magnet to deliver repeated low-intensity pulses to stimulate the brain. The magnetic field it creates is about the same strength as an MRI scan.

rTMS: Why it’s done
Several rTMS devices have been cleared to treat specific mental disorders. The FDA cleared the first rTMS device in 2008 for depression  in people who did not respond to at least one antidepressant medication in the current depressive episode. Although ECT is still considered the "gold standard" for treatment-resistant depression, strong clinical evidence supports the effectiveness of rTMS in reducing depressive symptoms. rTMS is now used to treat moderate-to-severe depression in cases where medications have proven ineffective or intolerable.

Since 2008, rTMS has been cleared to treat several types of depression, including depression with comorbid anxiety and depression with suicidality. In 2018, the FDA also cleared rTMS for severe OCD .

More recently, the FDA cleared a rapid-acting form of rTMS for treatment-resistant depression . Accelerated protocols that act more quickly than standard rTMS show similar effectiveness while shortening treatment length. Thus, patients benefit from receiving an entire course of treatment in much less time and getting relief from their symptoms more rapidly.

Newer forms of rTMS  involving magnetic pulses with other parameters are also under investigation to treat depression, OCD, and other mental disorders.

rTMS: How it works
Rather than electric currents, rTMS uses low-intensity magnetic pulses to stimulate the brain. Unlike ECT, in which stimulation is generalized, in rTMS, magnetic stimulation is targeted to a specific brain site. Also, in contrast to ECT, the procedure does not require anesthesia and can be performed in a clinical or office setting.

A typical rTMS session lasts 30–60 minutes. A typical course of rTMS treatment consists of daily sessions 5 days per week for 4–6 weeks.

Accelerated rTMS protocols  work much faster (within seconds to minutes). In this case, multiple sessions are delivered on a single day, with short breaks in between.

During the procedure:

An electromagnetic coil is held against the head near an area of the brain thought to be involved in mood regulation, cognitive control, or both. These brain areas include the left prefrontal cortex (for depression) and the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex or anterior cingulate cortex (for OCD). In deep TMS, two coils may be used to deliver more stimulation to the region and target larger structures deep in the brain.
Short electromagnetic pulses are repeatedly administered through the coil or coils. The patient usually feels a slight knocking or tapping on the head as the pulses are administered.
The magnetic pulses pass easily through the skull and cause small electric currents that stimulate nerve cells in the targeted brain region.
There is not consensus on the best way to position the coil on the head or deliver the electromagnetic pulses. It has also yet to be determined if rTMS works best when delivered as a single treatment or when combined with medication, psychotherapy, or both. Research is underway to establish the safest and most effective uses of rTMS, the optimal brain sites to target, and the best follow-up approach to sustain clinical improvement.

rTMS: Side effects
Overall, rTMS is safe and well tolerated  by patients. But, like all therapies described here, it can have side effects. These include the following:

Discomfort at the site on the head where the magnet is placed
Contraction or tingling of scalp, jaw, or face muscles during the procedure
Mild headaches or brief lightheadedness
Dizziness
Using magnetic pulses and targeting a specific brain site results in milder stimulation than in ECT, avoiding most seizure activity. Although it is possible for the procedure to cause seizures, a comprehensive review  found that the risk is rare. Most side effects appear to be mild and short-term when expert guidelines  are followed.

Long-term side effects have not been determined, and more research is needed to establish the long-term safety of rTMS.

What is vagus nerve stimulation?
artist depiction of vagus nerve stimulation
Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) is a surgical procedure that involves a device implanted under the skin. The device sends electrical pulses through the left vagus nerve that runs from the brainstem through the neck and down the side of the chest and abdomen. The nerve carries messages from the brain to the body's major organs, including the heart, lungs, and intestines, and between areas of the brain that control mood, sleep, and other functions.

More recently, this therapy has been simplified by the introduction of noninvasive VNS (known as transcutaneous VNS [tVNS] ). tVNS uses a portable device to send electrical stimulation through the skin to activate the vagus nerve. Although tVNS is still experimental, the approach may offer advantages over surgical VNS, such as greater accessibility and affordability, while avoiding surgical complications.

VNS: Why it’s done
VNS was initially developed as a treatment for epilepsy. Research using brain scans showed that the procedure also affected areas of the brain involved in mood regulation, with favorable effects on depression symptoms.

In 2005, the FDA approved surgical VNS for depression  when the following conditions are met:

The patient is 18 years of age and older.
The depression has lasted 2 or more years.
The depression is severe or recurrent.
The depression has not eased after trying at least four other treatments.
Despite FDA approval for depression, VNS is not intended as a first-line treatment and remains infrequently used. The results of studies examining its effectiveness for depression have been mixed. Whereas a review of clinical trials  of VNS for treatment-resistant depression found a sustained reduction in depression symptoms and enhanced quality of life, other studies  did not report meaningful improvements.

Although noninvasive forms of VNS have also shown antidepressant effects , tVNS is not authorized by the FDA as a treatment for depression. However, a portable VNS device has been cleared by the FDA to treat post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)  under a Breakthrough Device Designation, given to medical devices with preliminary evidence of clinical effectiveness compared to other available treatments. Research is ongoing to test the efficacy and safety of tVNS for depression, PTSD, and other mental disorders.

VNS: How it works
VNS is traditionally a surgical procedure.

A device about the size of a stopwatch called a pulse generator is implanted in the upper left side of the chest while the patient is under anesthesia.
Connected to the pulse generator is an electrical lead wire, which is then connected from the generator to the left vagus nerve.
Typically, 30-second electrical pulses are sent every five minutes from the generator to the vagus nerve. The duration and frequency of the pulses may vary depending on how the generator is programmed.
The vagus nerve, in turn, delivers those electrical signals to the brain.
The pulse generator, which operates continuously, is powered by a battery that lasts around 10 years, after which it must be replaced. Patients usually do not feel pain or discomfort as the device operates.

It may be several months before a patient notices any benefits, and not all patients respond to VNS. Some patients have no improvement in symptoms, and some may get worse.

The device can be temporarily deactivated by placing a magnet over the chest where the generator is implanted. A patient may want to deactivate the device if side effects become intolerable or before engaging in strenuous activity or exercise because it can interfere with breathing. The device reactivates when the magnet is removed.

Noninvasive forms of VNS consist of a device worn around the neck or ears or a handheld device. There are many questions about the most effective stimulation sites, parameters, and protocols for tVNS, and research is ongoing to determine the optimal conditions to achieve the greatest clinical benefits.

VNS: Side effects
VNS is not without risk. There may be complications, such as infection or pain from the implant surgery, or the device may come loose, move around, or malfunction, all of which can require additional surgery to correct.

Other potential side effects include the following:

Discomfort or tingling in the area where the device is implanted
Voice changes or hoarseness
Cough or sore throat
Neck pain or headaches
Breathing problems, especially during exercise
Difficulty swallowing
Nausea or vomiting
If cleared by the FDA, tVNS devices may help overcome some of these surgical issues. Nonetheless, mild side effects of tVNS have been reported, including:

Tingling, pain, or itchiness around the stimulation site
Nausea or vomiting
Dizziness
The long-term side effects of all forms of VNS are unknown.

Experimental therapies
Other brain stimulation therapies are actively being explored for specific mental disorders. The following therapies are still considered experimental and have not yet been authorized by the FDA to treat mental disorders.

What is magnetic seizure therapy?
artist depiction of magnetic seizure therapy
Magnetic seizure therapy (MST) is a noninvasive procedure that uses high-powered magnetic stimulation to induce seizures. The seizures are targeted to a specific site in the brain.

In the United States, MST is available only as part of a clinical trial or research study. NIMH has information for people interested in joining a clinical trial of MST or another brain stimulation therapy.

MST: How it works
MST combines aspects of both ECT and rTMS. Like rTMS, MST uses magnetic pulses to stimulate a specific brain site. The pulses are given at a higher intensity and frequency than in rTMS to induce a seizure. But the strength of the stimulation is less than in ECT and is also more focused in the brain. Like in ECT, the patient is anesthetized and given a muscle relaxant to prevent movement during the procedure. The goal is to retain the effectiveness of ECT while reducing the risk of cognitive side effects.

During the procedure:

An electromagnetic coil is held against the head, typically targeting the brain’s prefrontal area.
Rapidly alternating strong magnetic pulses pass through the coil into the brain to induce a seizure. Anesthesia is used to ensure that the patient does not experience pain or feel the electrical pulses.
The magnetic dosage is individualized for each patient by finding the patient-specific seizure threshold.
There is not agreement on MST's optimal dosing, coil size, and stimulation site, and researchers are actively conducting studies to determine those specifications.

MST: Why it’s done
Introduced in 2001, MST is currently in the early stages of investigation and clinical use for treating mental disorders. A review of randomized clinical trials  examining MST for treatment-resistant depression showed promising results. A recent multicenter clinical study  of people with severe depression showed significant and sustained antidepressant effects of MST and that it was as effective as ECT in treating the disorder, while leading to fewer cognitive side effects.

However, more confirmatory evidence is needed to draw conclusions about MST’s effectiveness in treating depression and other mental disorders.

MST: Side effects
Like ECT, MST carries the risk of side effects caused by anesthesia and the induction of a seizure. These side effects can include the following:

Headaches or scalp pain
Dizziness
Nausea or vomiting
Muscle aches or fatigue
A systematic review and meta-analysis  found that MST produced fewer memory problems and other cognitive side effects and caused less confusion and shorter seizures compared to ECT.

What is deep brain stimulation?
artist depiction of deep brain stimulation
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a surgical procedure that uses electricity to directly stimulate sites in the brain.

DBS can be used to treat severe OCD or depression in patients who have not responded to other treatments. It is available for other mental disorders only as part of a clinical trial.

DBS: How it works
DBS works by sending electrical pulses to specific brain areas. It requires surgery to implant electrodes in the brain. The specific brain area depends on the disorder being treated. For depression, the brain area was initially the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex, which can be overactive in depression and other mood disorders, and now includes several brain areas. For OCD, the brain area is usually the ventral capsule/ventral striatum or the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis.

Prior to the procedure, scans of the brain are taken using MRI, which the surgeon uses as a guide to determine where to place the electrodes during surgery.

Once a patient is ready for surgery:

The head is numbed with a local anesthetic so the patient does not feel pain.
The surgeon drills one or two small holes into the patient’s head; threads a thin insulated wire, usually a pair of wires, through the hole(s) and into the brain; and places electrodes into a specific brain area.
The patient is awake while the electrodes are implanted to provide feedback on their placement but does not feel pain because the head is numbed and the brain itself does not register pain.
After the electrodes are implanted, the patient is put under general anesthesia.
The electrodes are attached to wires that run inside the body from the head, through the neck and shoulder, and down to the chest, where a small battery-operated generator (about the size of a pacemaker) is implanted. The pulse generator is placed under the skin in the upper chest. Whereas early DBS models used two pulse generators, one wired to each of the two implanted electrodes, most newer models use a single pulse generator to stimulate both electrodes.
From the pulse generator, electrical pulses are delivered through the wires to the electrodes in the brain. Stimulation is applied continuously, and its frequency and level are customized to each patient. Although it is unclear exactly how DBS works to reduce symptoms, researchers believe that the pulses help "reset" the malfunctioning area of the brain so that it works normally again.
After the procedure, the patient may be given a device-based tool (like a hand-held controller or smart phone app) to help them monitor and manage their symptoms at home or provide feedback to their clinical care team.

DBS: Why it's done
DBS was first developed to treat movement disorders , including tremor and Parkinson's disease.

The FDA has since cleared DBS for severe OCD under a Humanitarian Device Exemption , which is a provision for rare diseases or conditions experienced by relatively few patients among whom it has been difficult to gather evidence to demonstrate effectiveness. However, there is still much to be learned about optimizing DBS treatment. Although a systematic review  found that DBS improves OCD symptoms, other review articles  have called for more confirmatory evidence before drawing conclusions about its effectiveness.

Similarly, DBS received Breakthrough Device Designation from the FDA in 2022  to investigate its use for treatment-resistant depression. A systematic review and meta-analysis  showed favorable effects of DBS in treating depression symptoms. Nonetheless, it remains an experimental treatment for depression until more data from high-quality studies are available.

DBS: Side effects
DBS carries risks associated with any brain surgery. For example, the procedure may lead to the following:

Bleeding in the brain or stroke
Device-related discomfort, pain, or infection around the incision
Infection near the incision site
Headaches
Disorientation or confusion
Cognitive impairment
Lightheadedness, dizziness, nausea, or vomiting
Trouble sleeping, agitation, or restlessness
Because the procedure is still being studied, other side effects not yet identified are possible. Long-term benefits and side effects are unknown.

Are there other types of brain stimulation therapy?
Other types of brain stimulation therapy are in development. Most are used in combination with other therapies or treatments to optimize clinical outcomes.

One emerging therapy that shows promise for treating mental disorders is trigeminal nerve stimulation (TNS) . The FDA approved TNS to treat attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)  in children, but it has not yet been approved to treat other conditions or for adults.

Other noninvasive brain stimulation therapies include, but are not limited to, the following:

Transcranial random noise stimulation (tRNS)
Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)
Transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS)
Transcranial ultrasound stimulation (TUS)
The Neuromodulation and Neurostimulation Program and Multimodal Neurotherapeutics Program at NIMH support researchers as they develop new therapies and refine existing therapies to treat mental disorders and conditions.

How can I find a clinical trial for brain stimulation therapy?
NIMH supports a wide range of research, including clinical trials that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. The goal of a clinical trial is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although people may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, they should know that the primary purpose is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others can be better helped in the future.

Researchers at NIMH and around the country conduct many studies with people experiencing mental disorders and healthy volunteers. Because of clinical trials, we have new and better treatment options today. Talk to a health care provider about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you.

To learn more or find a study, visit:

Research Conducted at NIMH: Join a Study
NIMH Clinical Trials – Information for Participants
ClinicalTrials.gov: Brain Stimulation Therapies 
Mental Health Medications
Overview
Medications can play a role in treating mental disorders and conditions and are often used in combination with other treatment approaches such as psychotherapies and brain stimulation therapies. Medications can affect people in different ways, and it may take several tries to find the medication that is most effective with the fewest side effects. It’s important for people to work with a health care provider or mental health professional to develop a treatment plan that meets their needs and medical situation.

Information about medications is updated frequently. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Medication Guides webpage  for the latest warnings, patient medication guides, and newly approved medications. The MedlinePlus Drugs, Herbs and Supplements  website also provides information on medications, including side effects and FDA warnings.

This page provides basic information about mental health medications, but it is not a complete source for all medications available and should not be used as a guide for making medical decisions.

Antidepressants
Antidepressants are medications used to treat depression. In some cases, health care providers may prescribe antidepressants to treat other health conditions, such as anxiety, pain , and insomnia .

Commonly prescribed types of antidepressants are:

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)
Norepinephrine-dopamine reuptake inhibitors (NDRIs)
These medications are commonly prescribed because they improve the symptoms of a broad group of depressive and anxiety disorders. They are also associated with fewer side effects than older antidepressants. Although older antidepressants, such as tricyclics and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), are associated with more side effects, they may be the best option for some people.

Antidepressants take time—usually 4−8 weeks—to work, and problems with sleep, appetite, energy, and concentration often improve before mood lifts. Giving a medication a chance to work is important before deciding whether it is right for you.

Common side effects of SSRIs and other antidepressants include upset stomach, headache, or sexual dysfunction. The side effects are generally mild and tend to go away with time. People who are sensitive to the side effects of these medications sometimes benefit from starting with a low dose, increasing the daily dose very slowly, and changing when or how they take the medication (for example, at bedtime or with food).

Esketamine  is an FDA-approved medication for treatment-resistant depression, which may be diagnosed when a person’s symptoms do not improve after trying at least two antidepressants. Esketamine is delivered as a nasal spray in a health care provider’s office, a clinic, or a hospital. It often acts rapidly, typically within a couple of hours, to relieve depression symptoms. People usually continue to take an oral antidepressant to maintain the improvement in their symptoms.

Combining antidepressants with other medications or supplements that act on the serotonin system, such as triptans (often used to treat migraine headaches) and St. John’s wort (a dietary supplement), can cause a rare but life-threatening illness called serotonin syndrome . Symptoms of serotonin syndrome include agitation, muscle twitches, hallucinations (seeing or hearing things others do not see or hear), high temperature, and unusual blood pressure changes. For most people, the risk of such extreme reactions is low. It is important for health care providers to consider all possible interactions and use extra care in prescribing and monitoring medication combinations that have an above-average risk.

Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants, especially in the first few weeks after starting the medication or when the dose is changed. People of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.

If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline  at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org . In life-threatening situations, call 911.

Anti-anxiety medications
Anti-anxiety medications help reduce symptoms of anxiety, such as panic attacks and extreme fear and worry.

Many medications used to treat depression—including SSRIs and SNRIs—may also be used to treat anxiety. In the case of panic disorder or social anxiety disorder, health care providers typically start with SSRIs or other antidepressants as the initial treatment because they have fewer side effects than other medications.

Benzodiazepines are another common type of anti-anxiety medication used to treat some short-term anxiety symptoms. They are sometimes used to treat generalized anxiety disorder.

Health care providers may also prescribe beta-blockers off-label to treat short-term anxiety symptoms, even though the medication is not approved for that specific purpose. For instance, people with a phobia—an overwhelming and unreasonable fear of an object or situation like spiders or public speaking—often experience intense physical symptoms, such as rapid heart rate, sweating, and tremors. Beta-blockers can help manage these symptoms.

Benzodiazepines and beta-blockers are useful as needed to reduce severe anxiety in the short-term. However, taking benzodiazepines over long periods may lead to drug tolerance or even dependence. To avoid these problems, health care providers usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods and taper them slowly to reduce the likelihood of withdrawal symptoms or renewed anxiety symptoms. Beta-blockers generally are not recommended for people with asthma or diabetes because they may worsen the symptoms of both conditions.

Buspirone  is a different type of anti-anxiety medication that can be used to treat anxiety over longer periods. In contrast to benzodiazepines, buspirone must be taken every day for 3−4 weeks to reach its full effect, and it is not effective for treating anxiety on an as-needed basis.

Stimulants
Health care providers may prescribe stimulant medications to treat attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and narcolepsy . Stimulants increase alertness, attention, and energy. They can also elevate blood pressure, heart rate, and breathing.

Prescription stimulants improve alertness and focus for most people, regardless of diagnosis. These medications can markedly improve daily functioning for people with significant focus problems, such as people with ADHD. Although motor hyperactivity associated with ADHD in children usually goes away by the time they reach adolescence, people with ADHD may continue to experience inattention and have difficulty focusing into adulthood. As such, stimulant medications can be helpful for adults, as well as for children and adolescents, with ADHD.

Stimulants are safe when taken under a health care provider’s supervision and used as directed. Some children may report feeling slightly different or unlike their usual selves while taking the medication. Most side effects of stimulants are minor and not seen at low doses.

Some parents worry that stimulants may lead to misuse or dependence, but evidence shows this is unlikely when the medications are used as prescribed. Other challenges with stimulant treatment, such as sleep disturbance and slowed growth, can generally be safely managed by a health care provider.

Antipsychotics
Antipsychotic medications are typically used to treat psychosis, a condition that involves some loss of contact with reality. People experiencing a psychotic episode often experience delusions (false beliefs) or hallucinations (hearing or seeing things others do not see or hear). Psychosis can be related to drug use or a mental disorder such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or severe depression (also known as “psychotic depression”).

Health care providers may also prescribe antipsychotic medications in combination with other medications to relieve symptoms associated with delirium, dementia, or other mental health conditions. Antipsychotic treatment for older adults necessitates additional care and consideration. The FDA requires that all antipsychotic medication labels include a black-box warning stating that antipsychotics are associated with increased rates of stroke and death in older adults with dementia.

Older, first-generation antipsychotic medications are sometimes called “typical” antipsychotics or “neuroleptics.” Long-term use of typical antipsychotic medications may lead to a condition involving uncontrollable muscle movements called tardive dyskinesia (TD). TD can range from mild to severe. People who think they might have TD should check with their health care provider before stopping their medication.

Newer, second-generation medications are sometimes called “atypical” antipsychotics. Several atypical antipsychotics may be used to treat a broader range of symptoms compared with older medications. For example, these medications are sometimes used to treat bipolar depression or depression that has not responded to antidepressant medication alone. Health care providers may ask people taking atypical antipsychotic medications to participate in regular monitoring to check weight, glucose levels, and lipid levels.

Some symptoms, such as feeling agitated and having hallucinations, typically go away within days of starting antipsychotic medication. Other symptoms, such as delusions, usually go away within a few weeks of starting antipsychotic medication. However, people may not experience the full effects of antipsychotic medication for up to 6 weeks.

If a person’s symptoms do not improve with usual antipsychotic medications, they may be prescribed an atypical antipsychotic called clozapine . People who take clozapine must have regular blood tests to check for a potentially dangerous side effect that occurs in 1% to 2% of people.

Mood stabilizers
Mood stabilizers are typically used to treat bipolar disorder and mood changes associated with other mental disorders. In some cases, health care providers may prescribe mood stabilizers to augment the effect of other medications used to treat depression.

Lithium , an effective mood stabilizer, is approved for the treatment of mania and bipolar disorder. Some studies indicate that lithium may reduce the risk of suicide among people taking it for long-term symptom maintenance. Health care providers generally ask people who are taking lithium to participate in regular monitoring to check lithium levels and kidney and thyroid function.

Mood stabilizers are sometimes used to treat depression (usually along with an antidepressant), schizoaffective disorder, disorders of impulse control, and certain mental illnesses in children. For people with bipolar depression, health care providers typically prescribe a mood stabilizer and an antidepressant to reduce the risk of switching into mania (known as rapid cycling).

Some anticonvulsant medications may also be used as mood stabilizers, as they work better than lithium for certain people, such as people with “mixed” symptoms of mania and depression or those with rapid-cycling bipolar disorder. Health care providers generally ask people taking anticonvulsants to participate in regular monitoring to check medication levels and assess side effects and potential interactions with other common medications.

Special groups: Children, older adults, pregnant people, postpartum people
All people can take mental health medications, but some groups have special needs and considerations.

Children and adolescents
Many medications used to treat mental disorders are safe and effective for children and adolescents. However, it is important to know that children may experience different reactions and side effects than adults, and some medications have FDA warnings about potential side effects for younger people.

In some cases, a health care provider may prescribe an FDA-approved medication on an off-label basis to treat a child’s symptoms, even though the medication is not approved for the specific mental disorder or for use by people under a certain age. Although there has been less research on mental disorders in children than adults, there is evidence that medications can be helpful for children. It is important to monitor children and adolescents who take medications on an off-label basis.

A health care provider may suggest trying non-medication treatments first, such as psychotherapy, and add medication later, if necessary. In other cases, a health care provider may suggest non-medication treatment in combination with medication. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) provides more information on common treatment options for children and adolescents.

Older adults
People over age 65 should take extra care with medications, especially if they are taking multiple medications. Older adults are often more sensitive to medications and can have a higher risk of experiencing drug interactions. Even healthy older adults react to medications differently than younger people because older adults’ bodies often process and eliminate medications more slowly.

Before starting a medication, older adults and their family members should talk to a health care provider about any effects the medication may have on physical and mental functioning. The health care provider can also discuss strategies to make it easier to follow the treatment plan, helping ensure that older adults take the correct dose at the correct time.

The National Institute on Aging has information and practical tips to help older adults take their medications safely .

People who are pregnant or may become pregnant
Researchers are continuing to investigate mental health medications during pregnancy. The risks associated with taking medication during pregnancy depend on the type of medication and the stage of pregnancy. While no medication is considered universally safe during pregnancy, untreated mental disorders can also pose risks to the pregnant person and the developing fetus.

Pregnant people should work with a health care provider to develop a personalized treatment plan that considers their individual needs and circumstances. It is important to weigh the benefits and risks of all available treatment options, including psychotherapies, medications, brain stimulation therapies, or a combination of these options. Health care providers may closely monitor a person’s physical and mental health throughout pregnancy and after delivery to look for signs of perinatal or postpartum depression.

Certain medications taken during pregnancy, including some benzodiazepines, mood stabilizers, and antipsychotic medications, have been linked with birth defects, but the risks vary widely and depend on the specific medication.

Antidepressants, especially SSRIs, are generally considered safe for use during pregnancy. Although antidepressants can cross into the placenta and reach the fetus, the risk of birth defects and other problems is very low. Some studies have found an association between third-trimester SSRI exposure and certain symptoms, including breathing problems, in newborns. However, the FDA does not find sufficient evidence for a causal link  and recommends that health care providers treat depression during pregnancy according to the person’s specific needs.

Visit the FDA website for more information on medications and pregnancy .

Postpartum people
Researchers are also investigating medications to help people who experience mental disorders after pregnancy and during the postpartum period. Much of this research has focused on one of the most common postpartum mental disorders—postpartum depression.

The FDA has approved two medications specifically to treat severe postpartum depression. The first is brexanolone , which is administered through an IV by a health care professional during a brief hospital stay. The other is zuranolone , which is an oral medication taken in pill form. In clinical trials, both medications reduced postpartum depression symptoms more quickly and effectively than traditional antidepressants.

Postpartum people should work with a health care provider to determine the best treatment plan based on their prenatal health and current symptoms. Like with mental disorders during pregnancy, it is important to weigh the benefits and risks of all treatment options and closely monitor physical and mental health during treatment.

The Office on Women’s Health has more information on treatments for postpartum depression .

Understanding your medications
People respond to medications in different ways, and it may take several tries to find the medication that is most effective with the fewest side effects. In some cases, people find that a medication helps for a while and then their symptoms return. It often takes some time for a medication to work, so it is important to stick with the treatment plan and take medication as prescribed.

People should not stop taking a prescribed medication, even if they are feeling better, without the help of a health care provider. A provider can adjust the treatment plan to slowly and safely decrease the medication dose. It’s important to give the body time to adjust to the change. Stopping a medication too soon may cause unpleasant or harmful side effects.

If you are prescribed a medication:

Tell a health care provider about all other medications, vitamins, and supplements you are already taking.
Remind a health care provider about any allergies. Tell them about any problems you had with medications in the past.
Make sure you understand how to take the medication before you start using it, and take the medication as instructed.
Talk to a health care provider about possible side effects and what to expect when taking a medication.
Do not take medications prescribed for another person. Do not give your prescribed medication to someone else.
Call a health care provider right away if you have problems with your medication or are worried that it might be doing more harm than good. The provider will work with you to address the problems and determine next steps.
Report serious side effects to the FDA MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting Program .
Contact FDA MedWatch
The FDA is responsible for protecting public health by ensuring the safety, efficacy, and security of medications, biological products, and medical devices. Contact FDA MedWatch  to voluntarily report a:

Serious adverse effect
Product quality problem
Product use error
Product failure that you suspect is associated with an FDA-regulated drug, biologic, medical device, dietary supplement, or cosmetic
Psychotherapies
Overview
Psychotherapy (sometimes called talk therapy) refers to a variety of treatments that aim to help a person identify and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. Most psychotherapy takes place when a licensed mental health professional and a patient meet one-on-one or with other patients in a group setting.

You might seek out psychotherapy for many reasons, including the following:

Dealing with severe or long-term stress from a job or family situation, the loss of a loved one, or relationship or family problems
Having symptoms with no physical explanation, such as changes in sleep or appetite, low energy level, lack of interest or pleasure in activities you once enjoyed, persistent irritability, excessive worry, or a sense of discouragement or hopelessness that won’t go away
A health care provider suspecting you have or diagnosing you with a mental disorder that is interfering with your life
Supporting a family member or child who has been diagnosed with a condition affecting their mental health
First being examined by a health care provider can help ensure that there is no physical health issue that would explain symptoms. This step is important because sometimes symptoms, like a change in mood or trouble concentrating, are due to a medical condition.

Psychotherapy and other treatment options
Psychotherapy can be used as an alternative to or alongside medication and other treatment options. Choosing the right treatment plan should be based on a person's individual needs and medical situation and occur under the guidance of a mental health professional.

Even when medication relieves symptoms, psychotherapy can help a person address specific issues. These might include self-defeating ways of thinking, irrational fears, problems interacting with other people, or difficulty coping with situations at home, school, or work.

Elements of psychotherapy
A variety of psychotherapies and interventions have shown effectiveness in treating mental health disorders. Often, the type of treatment is tailored to the specific disorder. For example, the treatment approach for someone who has obsessive-compulsive disorder is different than the approach for someone who has bipolar disorder. Therapists may use one primary approach or incorporate other elements depending on their training, the disorder being treated, and the needs of the person receiving treatment.

Elements of psychotherapy can include:

Helping a person become aware of automatic ways of thinking that are inaccurate or harmful (for example, having a low opinion of their abilities) and then finding ways to question those thoughts, understand how the thoughts affect their emotions and behavior, and change self-defeating patterns, in an approach known as cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
Identifying ways to cope with stress and developing specific problem-solving strategies
Examining a person’s interactions with others and teaching social and communication skills
Applying mindfulness and relaxation techniques, such as meditation and breathing exercises
Using exposure therapy (a type of CBT) for people with anxiety disorders, in which a person spends brief periods in a supportive environment learning to tolerate the distress caused by certain items, ideas, or imagined scenes until, over time, the fear associated with those things dissipates
Tracking emotions and behaviors to raise awareness of their impact on each other
Using supportive counseling to help a person explore troubling issues and receive emotional support
Creating a safety plan to help a person who has thoughts of self-harm or suicide recognize warning signs and use coping strategies, such as contacting friends, family, or emergency personnel
Note that there are many different types of psychotherapy. Therapies are often variations of an established approach, such as CBT. There is no formal approval process for psychotherapies like there is for medications by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

However, for many therapies, research involving large numbers of patients has provided evidence that the treatment is effective. These evidence-based therapies have been shown to reduce symptoms of depression, anxiety, and other mental disorders. NIMH's health topic pages list some of the evidence-based therapies used to treat specific disorders. 

What to look for in a therapist
Therapists have different professional backgrounds and specialties. This section and the next have information that can help you find out about a therapist’s credentials and find resources for locating therapists.

The approach a therapist uses depends on the disorder being treated and the training and experience of that therapist. Therapists may combine and adapt elements of different approaches.

Once you have identified one or more possible therapists, a preliminary conversation can help you understand how treatment will proceed and decide if you feel comfortable with the therapist. Rapport and trust are essential. Discussions in therapy are deeply personal, and it’s important that you feel comfortable with the therapist and have confidence in their expertise. These preliminary conversations may happen in person, by phone, or virtually. Consider trying to get answers to the following questions:

What are the credentials and experience of the therapist? Do they have a specialty?
What approach will the therapist take to help you? Do they practice a particular type of therapy? What is the rationale for the therapy and its evidence base?
Does the therapist have experience in diagnosing and treating the age group (for example, a child) and the specific condition for which treatment is being sought? If the patient is a child, how will parents or caregivers be involved in treatment?
What are the goals of therapy? Does the therapist recommend a specific time frame or number of sessions? How will progress be assessed, and what happens if you (or the therapist) feel you aren't starting to improve?
Are medications an option? Is this therapist able to prescribe medications?
Are meetings confidential? How is confidentiality assured? Are there limits to confidentiality?
Finding a therapist
Many types of professionals offer psychotherapy. Examples include psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, counselors, and psychiatric nurses. Information on providers’ credentials is available from the National Alliance on Mental Illness . In addition, you can find resources to help find a therapist on the NIMH's Help for Mental Illnesses webpage.

Your health insurance provider may have a list of mental health professionals participating in your plan. Other resources on the Help for Mental Illnesses webpage can help you look for reduced-cost health services. When talking with a prospective therapist, ask about treatment fees, whether the therapist participates in insurance plans, and whether there is a sliding scale for fees according to income.

The following professional organizations have directories or locators on their websites for mental health care professionals:

Academy of Cognitive and Behavioral Therapy 
American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry 
American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry 
American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy 
American Board of Clinical Social Work 
American Board of Professional Psychology 
American Psychiatric Association 
American Psychological Association 
Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies 
National Association of Social Workers 
National Register of Health Service Psychologists 
Psychology Today 
Society of Clinical Psychology 
National advocacy organizations provide information on finding a mental health professional, and some have practitioner locators on their websites. Examples include:

Anxiety & Depression Association of America  
Attention Deficit Disorder Association 
Children and Adults With Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 
Depression and Bipolar Support Alliance 
International OCD Foundation 
Mental Health America  
National Alliance on Mental Illness 
Note: NIMH does not evaluate the professional qualifications and competencies of individual practitioners listed on these websites. These resources are provided for informational purposes only. They are not comprehensive lists, and an organization’s inclusion does not constitute an endorsement by NIMH, the National Institutes of Health, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, or the U.S. government.

University or medical school-affiliated programs may offer treatment options, including training clinics. Search the website of local university health centers for their psychiatry or psychology departments. You can also go to your state or county government website and search for the health department for information on mental health-related programs within your state.

The goal of therapy is to gain relief from symptoms, maintain or improve daily functioning, and improve quality of life. If you have been in therapy for what feels like a reasonable amount of time and are not getting better, talk to your therapist or explore other mental health professionals or approaches.

Digital health options
The telephone, internet, and mobile devices have created new opportunities to provide more readily available and accessible treatment, including in areas where mental health professionals may not be physically available. Some of these approaches involve a therapist providing help at a distance. Still, others, such as web-based programs and mobile apps, are designed to provide immediate information and feedback in the absence of a therapist. For an overview, see NIMH's Technology and the Future of Mental Health Treatment webpage.

Learn more
Free fact sheets
Children and Mental Health: Is This Just a Stage?: This fact sheet provides information on children’s mental health, including how to assess your child’s behavior, when to seek help, first steps for parents, treatment options, and factors to consider when choosing a mental health professional. Also available en español.
My Mental Health: Do I Need Help?: This fact sheet provides information on assessing your mental health and determining if you need help. It offers examples of mild and severe symptoms and self-care activities and options for professional help. Also available en español.
Tips for Talking With a Health Care Provider About Your Mental Health: This fact sheet provides five tips to help prepare and guide you to talk to your health care provider about your mental health and get the most out of your visit. Also available en español.
What is Telemental Health?: This fact sheet provides information on telemental health services, including potential benefits and drawbacks of this kind of care and factors to consider when looking for a provider. Also available en español.
Federal resources
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality : This agency offers resources and information about health care, including information on effectiveness research.
Behavioral Health Treatments and Services : The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) provides information about treatment options and links to treatment service locators.
National Library of Medicine's PubMed : To read in-depth research on therapies for mental health disorders, use the PubMed database of medical literature to search for articles by topic.
Health hotlines
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline : The Lifeline provides free and confidential emotional support to people in suicidal crisis or emotional distress 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, across the United States. Call or text 988 to connect with a trained crisis counselor. Support is also available via live chat at 988lifeline.org . Para ayuda en español, llame al 988.
Disaster Distress Helpline : People affected by any disaster or tragedy can call this helpline, sponsored by SAMHSA, to receive immediate counseling. Call or text 1-800-985-5990 to connect with a trained professional from the closest crisis counseling center within the network.
Veterans Crisis Line : This helpline is a free, confidential resource for veterans of all ages and circumstances. Call 988 then press 1, text 838255, or chat online  to connect with 24/7 support.
More NIH Health Information Lines 
Bipolar disorder and alcohol use disorder, sometimes called alcoholism, often occur together. Although the association between bipolar disorder and alcohol use disorder isn't clearly understood, these factors likely play a role:

Inherited traits. Genetic differences appear to affect brain chemistry linked to bipolar disorder. These same traits may also affect the way the brain responds to alcohol and other drugs, increasing the risk of alcohol use disorder and addiction to other drugs.
Depression and anxiety. Some people drink to ease depression, anxiety and other symptoms of bipolar disorder. Drinking may seem to help, but in the long run it makes symptoms worse. This can lead to more drinking — a vicious cycle that's difficult to overcome.
Mania. This upswing from depression is usually characterized by an intensely elated (euphoric) mood and hyperactivity. It commonly causes bad judgment and lowered inhibitions, which can lead to increased alcohol use or drug abuse.
Bipolar disorder and alcohol use disorder or other types of substance abuse can be a dangerous combination. Each can worsen the symptoms and severity of the other. Having both conditions increases the risk of mood swings, depression, violence and suicide.

Someone who has both bipolar disorder and alcohol use disorder or another addiction is said to have a dual diagnosis. Treatment may require the expertise of mental health professionals who specialize in the treatment of both disorders.

If you've lost control over your drinking or you misuse drugs, get help before your problems become worse and harder to treat. Seeing a mental health professional right away is especially important if you also have signs and symptoms of bipolar disorder or another mental health condition.

