Depression is a serious medical illness. It's more than just a feeling of being sad or "blue" for a few days. If you are one of the more than 19 million teens and adults in the United States who have depression, the feelings do not go away. They persist and interfere with your everyday life. Symptoms can include:

Feeling sad or "empty"
Loss of interest in favorite activities
Overeating, or not wanting to eat at all
Not being able to sleep, or sleeping too much
Feeling very tired
Feeling hopeless, irritable, anxious, or guilty
Aches or pains, headaches, cramps, or digestive problems
Thoughts of death or suicide
Depression is a disorder of the brain. There are a variety of causes, including genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors. Depression can happen at any age, but it often begins in teens and young adults. It is much more common in women. Women can also get postpartum depression after the birth of a baby. Some people get seasonal affective disorder in the winter. Depression is one part of bipolar disorder.

There are effective treatments for depression, including antidepressants, talk therapy, or both.
What is depression?
Everyone feels sad or low sometimes, but these feelings usually pass with a little time. Depression (also called major depressive disorder or clinical depression) is different. It can cause severe symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. It is an illness that can affect anyone—regardless of age, race, income, culture, or education. Research suggests that genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors play a role in depression.

Depression may occur with other mental disorders and other illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and chronic pain. Depression can make these conditions worse, and vice versa. Sometimes medications taken for these illnesses cause side effects that contribute to depression symptoms.

What are the different types of depression?
Two common forms of depression are:

Major depression, which includes symptoms of depression most of the time for at least 2 weeks that typically interfere with one’s ability to work, sleep, study, and eat.
Persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), which often includes less severe symptoms of depression that last much longer, typically for at least 2 years.
Other forms of depression include:

Perinatal depression, which occurs when a woman experiences major depression during pregnancy or after delivery (postpartum depression).
Seasonal affective disorder, which comes and goes with the seasons, typically starting in late fall and early winter and going away during spring and summer.
Depression with symptoms of psychosis, which is a severe form of depression where a person experiences psychosis symptoms, such as delusions (disturbing, false fixed beliefs) or hallucinations (hearing or seeing things that others do not see or hear).
Individuals diagnosed with bipolar disorder (formerly called manic depression or manic-depressive illness) also experience depression.

What are the signs and symptoms of depression?
Common symptoms of depression include:

Persistent sad, anxious, or “empty” mood
Feelings of hopelessness or pessimism
Feelings of irritability, frustration‚ or restlessness
Feelings of guilt, worthlessness, or helplessness
Loss of interest or pleasure in hobbies or activities
Decreased energy, fatigue, or being “slowed down”
Difficulty concentrating, remembering, or making decisions
Difficulty sleeping, early morning awakening, or oversleeping
Changes in appetite or unplanned weight changes
Aches or pains, headaches, cramps, or digestive problems without a clear physical cause and that do not ease even with treatment
Suicide attempts or thoughts of death or suicide
How is depression diagnosed?
To be diagnosed with depression, an individual must have five depression symptoms every day, nearly all day, for at least 2 weeks. One of the symptoms must be a depressed mood or a loss of interest or pleasure in almost all activities. Children and adolescents may be irritable rather than sad.

If you think you may have depression, talk to your health care provider. Primary care providers routinely diagnose and treat depression and refer individuals to mental health professionals, such as psychologists or psychiatrists.

During the visit, your provider may ask when your symptoms began, how long they last, how often they occur, and if they keep you from going out or doing your usual activities. It may help to make some notes about your symptoms before your visit. Certain medications and some medical conditions, such as viruses or a thyroid disorder, can cause the same depression symptoms. Your provider can rule out these possibilities by doing a physical exam, interview, and lab tests.

Read NIMH’s Tips for Talking With Your Health Care Provider to help prepare for and get the most out of your visit. For additional resources, visit the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality website .

Does depression look the same in everyone?
Depression can affect people differently, depending on their age.

Children with depression may be anxious, cranky, pretend to be sick, refuse to go to school, cling to a parent, or worry that a parent may die.

Older children and teens with depression may get into trouble at school, sulk, be easily frustrated‚ feel restless, or have low self-esteem. They also may have other disorders, such as anxiety and eating disorders, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, or substance use disorder. Older children and teens are more likely to experience excessive sleepiness (called hypersomnia) and increased appetite (called hyperphagia). In adolescence, females begin to experience depression more often than males, likely due to the biological, life cycle, and hormonal factors unique to women.

Younger adults with depression are more likely to be irritable, complain of weight gain and hypersomnia, and have a negative view of life and the future. They often have other disorders, such as generalized anxiety disorder, social phobia, panic disorder, and substance use disorders.

Middle-aged adults with depression may have more depressive episodes, decreased libido, middle-of-the-night insomnia, or early morning awakening. They also may more frequently report having gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea or constipation.

Older adults with depression commonly experience sadness or grief or may have other less obvious symptoms. They may report a lack of emotions rather than a depressed mood. Older adults also are more likely to have other medical conditions or pain that may cause or contribute to depression. In severe cases, memory and thinking problems (called pseudodementia) may be prominent.

How is depression treated?
Depression treatment typically involves medication, psychotherapy, or both. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms, brain stimulation therapy may be another treatment option. In milder cases of depression, treatment might begin with psychotherapy alone, and medication added if the individual continues to experience symptoms. For moderate or severe depression, many mental health professionals recommend a combination of medication and therapy at the start of treatment.

Choosing the right treatment plan should be based on a person’s individual needs and medical situation under a provider’s care. It may take some trial and error to find the treatment that works best for you. You can learn more about the different types of treatment, including psychotherapy, medication, and brain stimulation therapies on the NIMH's depression webpage. For information on finding a mental health professional and questions to ask when considering therapy, visit NIMH’s psychotherapies webpage.

Medications
Antidepressants are medications commonly used to treat depression. They take time to work—usually 4 to 8 weeks—and symptoms such as problems with sleep, appetite, or concentration often improve before mood lifts. It is important to give medication a chance before deciding whether or not it works.

Please Note: Some individuals—especially children, teenagers, and young adults—may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants, particularly in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. All patients taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.

Information about medications changes frequently. Visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website  for the latest warnings, patient medication guides, and newly approved medications.

Treatment-resistant depression occurs when a person doesn’t get better after trying at least two antidepressants. Esketamine is a newer FDA-approved medication for treatment-resistant depression delivered as a nasal spray in a doctor’s office, clinic, or hospital. It often acts rapidly—typically within a couple of hours—to relieve depression symptoms. Individuals usually continue to take an oral antidepressant to maintain the improvement in depression.

Another option for treatment-resistant depression is to add a different type of medication that may make an antidepressant more effective, such as an antipsychotic or anticonvulsant medication or bupropion, an antidepressant that works differently from most.

Medications prescribed by your health care provider for depression can have side effects, but these may lessen over time. Talk to your provider about any side effects that you have. Do not stop taking medications without the help of a health care provider. If you abruptly stop taking your medicine, you may experience severe withdrawal symptoms.

FDA has not approved any natural products for depression. While research is ongoing, some people find natural products, including vitamin D and the herbal dietary supplement St. John’s wort, to help depression. Do not use St. John’s wort or other dietary supplements for depression before talking to your provider. For more information, visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health website .

Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy” or “counseling”) teaches individuals with depression new ways of thinking and behaving and helps with changing habits that contribute to depression. Most psychotherapy occurs with a licensed, trained mental health professional in one-on-one sessions or with other individuals in a group setting. Two effective psychotherapies to treat depression include cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and interpersonal therapy (IPT). The use of older forms of psychotherapy, such as dynamic therapy, for a limited time also may help some people with depression.

With CBT, people learn to challenge and change unhelpful thinking patterns and behavior to improve their depressive and anxious feelings. Recent advances in CBT include introducing mindfulness principles and the development of specialized forms of therapy targeting particular symptoms, such as insomnia.

IPT focuses on interpersonal and life events that impact mood and vice versa. The goal of IPT is to help people improve their communication skills within relationships, establish social support networks, and develop realistic expectations to help them deal with crises or other issues that may be contributing to or worsening their depression.

Brain Stimulation Therapy
Brain stimulation therapy, which involves activating or inhibiting the brain directly with electricity or magnetic waves, is another option for some people when other depression treatments have not been effective.

The most common forms of brain stimulation therapy include electroconvulsive therapy and repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation. Other brain stimulation therapies are newer and, in some cases, still experimental.

How can I find help?
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration provides the Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator , an online tool for finding mental health treatment and support groups in your area. For additional resources, visit NIMH's Help for Mental Illnesses webpage.

How can I take care of myself?
Once you begin treatment, you should gradually start to feel better. Go easy on yourself during this time. Try to do things you used to enjoy. Even if you don’t feel like doing them, they can improve your mood. Other things that may help:

Try to get some physical activity. Just 30 minutes a day of walking can boost mood.
Try to maintain a regular bedtime and wake-up time.
Eat regular, healthy meals.
Do what you can as you can. Decide what must get done and what can wait.
Try to connect with other people, and talk with people you trust about how you are feeling.
Postpone important life decisions until you feel better.
Avoid using alcohol, nicotine, or drugs, including medications not prescribed for you.
How can I help a loved one who is depressed?
If someone you know has depression, help them see a health care provider or mental health professional. You also can:

Offer support, understanding, patience, and encouragement.
Invite them out for walks, outings, and other activities.
Help them stick to their treatment plan, such as setting reminders to take prescribed medications.
Make sure they have transportation to therapy appointments.
Remind them that, with time and treatment, the depression will lift.
Take comments about suicide seriously, and report them to your loved one’s health care provider or therapist. If they are in immediate distress or thinking about hurting themselves, call 911 for emergency services or go to the nearest hospital emergency room.

Where can I find clinical trials for depression?
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. Although individuals may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so others may receive better help in the future.

Researchers at the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) and around the country conduct many studies with patients and healthy volunteers. Talk to your health care provider about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you. For more information, visit NIMH's clinical trials information.

Reprints
The information in this publication is in the public domain and may be reused or copied without permission. However, you may not reuse or copy images. Please cite the National Institute of Mental Health as the source. Read our copyright policy to learn more about our guidelines for reusing NIMH content.
Overview
Depression is a mood disorder that causes a persistent feeling of sadness and loss of interest. Also called major depressive disorder or clinical depression, it affects how you feel, think and behave and can lead to a variety of emotional and physical problems. You may have trouble doing normal day-to-day activities, and sometimes you may feel as if life isn't worth living.

More than just a bout of the blues, depression isn't a weakness and you can't simply "snap out" of it. Depression may require long-term treatment. But don't get discouraged. Most people with depression feel better with medication, psychotherapy or both.

Depression care at Mayo Clinic

Symptoms
Although depression may occur only once during your life, people typically have multiple episodes. During these episodes, symptoms occur most of the day, nearly every day and may include:

Feelings of sadness, tearfulness, emptiness or hopelessness
Angry outbursts, irritability or frustration, even over small matters
Loss of interest or pleasure in most or all normal activities, such as sex, hobbies or sports
Sleep disturbances, including insomnia or sleeping too much
Tiredness and lack of energy, so even small tasks take extra effort
Reduced appetite and weight loss or increased cravings for food and weight gain
Anxiety, agitation or restlessness
Slowed thinking, speaking or body movements
Feelings of worthlessness or guilt, fixating on past failures or self-blame
Trouble thinking, concentrating, making decisions and remembering things
Frequent or recurrent thoughts of death, suicidal thoughts, suicide attempts or suicide
Unexplained physical problems, such as back pain or headaches
For many people with depression, symptoms usually are severe enough to cause noticeable problems in day-to-day activities, such as work, school, social activities or relationships with others. Some people may feel generally miserable or unhappy without really knowing why.

Depression symptoms in children and teens
Common signs and symptoms of depression in children and teenagers are similar to those of adults, but there can be some differences.

In younger children, symptoms of depression may include sadness, irritability, clinginess, worry, aches and pains, refusing to go to school, or being underweight.
In teens, symptoms may include sadness, irritability, feeling negative and worthless, anger, poor performance or poor attendance at school, feeling misunderstood and extremely sensitive, using recreational drugs or alcohol, eating or sleeping too much, self-harm, loss of interest in normal activities, and avoidance of social interaction.
Depression symptoms in older adults
Depression is not a normal part of growing older, and it should never be taken lightly. Unfortunately, depression often goes undiagnosed and untreated in older adults, and they may feel reluctant to seek help. Symptoms of depression may be different or less obvious in older adults, such as:

Memory difficulties or personality changes
Physical aches or pain
Fatigue, loss of appetite, sleep problems or loss of interest in sex — not caused by a medical condition or medication
Often wanting to stay at home, rather than going out to socialize or doing new things
Suicidal thinking or feelings, especially in older men
When to see a doctor
If you feel depressed, make an appointment to see your doctor or mental health professional as soon as you can. If you're reluctant to seek treatment, talk to a friend or loved one, any health care professional, a faith leader, or someone else you trust.

When to get emergency help
If you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, call 911 in the U.S. or your local emergency number immediately.

Also consider these options if you're having suicidal thoughts:

Call your doctor or mental health professional.
Contact a suicide hotline.
In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Or use the Lifeline Chat. Services are free and confidential.
U.S. veterans or service members who are in crisis can call 988 and then press “1” for the Veterans Crisis Line. Or text 838255. Or chat online.
The Suicide & Crisis Lifeline in the U.S. has a Spanish language phone line at 1-888-628-9454 (toll-free).
Reach out to a close friend or loved one.
Contact a minister, spiritual leader or someone else in your faith community.
If you have a loved one who is in danger of suicide or has made a suicide attempt, make sure someone stays with that person. Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately. Or, if you think you can do so safely, take the person to the nearest hospital emergency room.

Causes
It's not known exactly what causes depression. As with many mental disorders, a variety of factors may be involved, such as:

Biological differences. People with depression appear to have physical changes in their brains. The significance of these changes is still uncertain, but may eventually help pinpoint causes.
Brain chemistry. Neurotransmitters are naturally occurring brain chemicals that likely play a role in depression. Recent research indicates that changes in the function and effect of these neurotransmitters and how they interact with neurocircuits involved in maintaining mood stability may play a significant role in depression and its treatment.
Hormones. Changes in the body's balance of hormones may be involved in causing or triggering depression. Hormone changes can result with pregnancy and during the weeks or months after delivery (postpartum) and from thyroid problems, menopause or a number of other conditions.
Inherited traits. Depression is more common in people whose blood relatives also have this condition. Researchers are trying to find genes that may be involved in causing depression.
Risk factors
Depression often begins in the teens, 20s or 30s, but it can happen at any age. More women than men are diagnosed with depression, but this may be due in part because women are more likely to seek treatment.

Factors that seem to increase the risk of developing or triggering depression include:

Certain personality traits, such as low self-esteem and being too dependent, self-critical or pessimistic
Traumatic or stressful events, such as physical or sexual abuse, the death or loss of a loved one, a difficult relationship, or financial problems
Blood relatives with a history of depression, bipolar disorder, alcoholism or suicide
Being lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender, or having variations in the development of genital organs that aren't clearly male or female (intersex) in an unsupportive situation
History of other mental health disorders, such as anxiety disorder, eating disorders or post-traumatic stress disorder
Abuse of alcohol or recreational drugs
Serious or chronic illness, including cancer, stroke, chronic pain or heart disease
Certain medications, such as some high blood pressure medications or sleeping pills (talk to your doctor before stopping any medication)
Complications
Depression is a serious disorder that can take a terrible toll on you and your family. Depression often gets worse if it isn't treated, resulting in emotional, behavioral and health problems that affect every area of your life.

Examples of complications associated with depression include:

Excess weight or obesity, which can lead to heart disease and diabetes
Pain or physical illness
Alcohol or drug misuse
Anxiety, panic disorder or social phobia
Family conflicts, relationship difficulties, and work or school problems
Social isolation
Suicidal feelings, suicide attempts or suicide
Self-mutilation, such as cutting
Premature death from medical conditions
Prevention
There's no sure way to prevent depression. However, these strategies may help.

Take steps to control stress, to increase your resilience and boost your self-esteem.
Reach out to family and friends, especially in times of crisis, to help you weather rough spells.
Get treatment at the earliest sign of a problem to help prevent depression from worsening.
Consider getting long-term maintenance treatment to help prevent a relapse of symptoms.
Depression (major depressive disorder) is a common and serious medical illness that negatively affects how you feel, the way you think and how you act. Fortunately, it is also treatable. Depression causes feelings of sadness and/or a loss of interest in activities once enjoyed. It can lead to a variety of emotional and physical problems and can decrease a person’s ability to function at work and at home.

Depression symptoms can vary from mild to severe and can include:

Feeling sad or having a depressed mood
Loss of interest or pleasure in activities once enjoyed
Changes in appetite — weight loss or gain unrelated to dieting
Trouble sleeping or sleeping too much
Loss of energy or increased fatigue
Increase in purposeless physical activity (e.g., hand-wringing or pacing) or slowed movements and speech (actions observable by others)
Feeling worthless or guilty
Difficulty thinking, concentrating or making decisions
Thoughts of death or suicide
What is the difference between normal sadness or grieving and depression?
Everyone experiences a range of emotions over the course of days and weeks, typically varying based on events and circumstances. When disappointed, we usually feel sad. When we suffer a loss, we grieve. Normally these feelings ebb and flow. They respond to input and changes. By contrast, depression tends to feel heavy and constant. People who are depressed are less likely to be cheered, comforted or consoled. People who recover from depression often welcome the ability to feel normal sadness again, to have a “bad day,” as opposed to a leaden weight on their minds and souls every single day.

Once a person has been diagnosed and treated for depression, is it likely to return?
Of people diagnosed with major depressive disorder, who are treated and recover, at least half are likely to experience a recurrent episode sometime in their future. It may come soon after or not for many years. It may or may not be triggered by a life event. After several episodes of major depression, a psychiatrist may suggest long-term treatment.

What kinds of treatments work for depression?
A wide variety of treatments have been proven effective in treating depression. Some involve talking and behavioral change. Others involve taking medications. There are also techniques that focus on neuromodulation, which incorporates electrical, magnetic or other forms of energy to stimulate brain pathways. Examples of neuromodulation include electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), vagus-nerve stimulation (VNS), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and the experimental deep-brain stimulation (DBS).

The choice of therapy should be guided by the nature and severity of depression, past responses to treatment, and the patient’s and family’s beliefs and preferences. Whatever approach is selected, the patient should be a willing and active participant, engaging in psychotherapy or regularly taking the medication, for example.

What do I need to tell my doctor when discussing my feelings of depression?
Total openness is important. You should talk to your doctor about all of your symptoms, important milestones in your life and any history of abuse or trauma. Also tell your doctor about past history of depression or other emotional symptoms in yourself or family members, medical history, medications you are taking — prescribed or over-the-counter, how depression has affected your daily life and whether you ever think about suicide.

How long should I wait before I go and see a medical professional?
If your symptoms are mild, do not impair your work or home life, or adversely affect your health, and you do not think about suicide or self-harm, you could wait a week or two before visiting a professional to see if the symptoms may improve on their own. But more serious symptoms need immediate attention.

Do antidepressants have side effects?
Virtually all medicines can cause side effects. Typically, unwanted effects increase when the dose rises. Side effects usually vary from one drug to another and are especially variable between different medication classes. If you have previously taken a medicine and done well or poorly or had bothersome side effects, be sure to tell the doctor what happened. This should affect the choice of your next prescription. If you have never taken an antidepressant, discuss with your doctor which groups have which side effects. Let your doctor know which side effects you particularly wish to avoid, such as sedation or sexual disruption.
Depression Screening
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook Twitter Pinterest
What is depression screening?
A depression screening is also called a depression test. It's a standard set of questions that you answer to help your health care provider find out whether you have depression.

Depression is a common, serious mental health condition. Everyone feels sad at times, but depression is different than normal sadness or grief. Depression can affect how you think, feel, and behave. It makes it hard to function at home and work. You may lose interest in activities you once enjoyed. Some people with depression may feel worthless and might even think about harming themselves. Depression may also be part of other mental health conditions, such as bipolar disorder.

Because depression is a common mental health problem, depression screening is often done as part of a routine health checkup. Medical experts recommend that depression screening should be done for everyone starting at age 12. Screening can help find depression early. And treating depression early may make recovery faster. Most people with depression will get better.

Other names: depression test, Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D), Zung Self-Rating Depression Scale (SDS), Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS and GDS-SF)

What is it used for?
A depression screening is used to:

Help diagnose depression
Understand how severe depression may be
Help figure out what type of depression you have
There are different types of depression. The most common types are:

Major depression, also called major depressive disorder. The symptoms typically make it difficult to work, sleep, study and eat. With major depression, you have symptoms most of the time for at least two weeks.
Persistent depressive disorder, also called dysthymia. The symptoms are less severe than major depression, but they last much longer, usually for at least two years.
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD). This form of depression usually happens in winter when there's less sunlight. Most people with SAD tend to feel better in the spring and summer.
Postpartum depression. This is major depression that happens after giving birth. It's more severe and lasts longer than mild unhappiness and other mood changes that are often called the "baby blues." Major depression may also begin during pregnancy. Depression that happens during or shortly after pregnancy is called "perinatal depression." Medical experts recommend routine depression screening during pregnancy and after birth.
Why do I need depression screening?
Depression screening is often part of a routine checkup. You may also need depression screening if you show signs of depression, which may include:

Loss of interest or pleasure in activities you used to enjoy
Feeling sad or anxious
Feelings of guilt, worthlessness or helplessness
Trouble sleeping (insomnia) or sleeping too much
Fatigue and lack of energy
Trouble concentrating, remembering details, or making decisions
Changes in your weight
Thoughts of hurting yourself or suicide
If you are thinking about suicide or hurting yourself, get help right away:

Call 911 or go to your local emergency room
Contact a suicide hotline. In the United States, you can reach the National Suicide and Crisis Lifeline at any time:
Call or text 988
Chat online with Lifeline Chat
TTY users: Use your preferred relay service or dial 711 then 988
Veterans can contact the Veterans Crisis Line:
Call 988 then press 1
Text 838255
Chat online
Call your mental health provider or other provider
Reach out to a loved one or close friend
What happens during depression screening?
During a depression screening, you'll answer a standard set of questions. Your provider may ask the questions, or you may fill out a questionnaire form to discuss with your provider later.

In general, the questions ask you about:

Changes you've noticed in your:
Mood
Sleep habits
Appetite or weight
Energy levels
Ability to focus your attention
Stress levels
Medicines you take
Alcohol and drug use
Your personal and family history of depression and other mental health conditions
You may also have a physical exam. There's no lab test that can diagnose depression. But your provider may order blood tests to find out if another health condition, such as anemia or thyroid disease, may be causing depression.

During a blood test, a health care professional will take a blood sample from a vein in your arm, using a small needle. After the needle is inserted, a small amount of blood will be collected into a test tube or vial. You may feel a little sting when the needle goes in or out. This usually takes less than five minutes.

If you are being tested by a mental health provider, he or she may ask you more detailed questions about your feelings and behaviors. You may also be asked to fill out a questionnaire about these issues.

Will I need to do anything to prepare for depression screening?
You usually don't need any special preparations for a depression test or a blood test.

Are there any risks to depression screening?
There is no risk to answering questions or having a physical exam.

There is very little risk to having a blood test. You may have slight pain or bruising at the spot where the needle was put in, but most symptoms go away quickly.

What do the results mean?
If you are diagnosed with depression, your provider will discuss your treatment options. Starting treatment as soon as possible may improve your chance of recovery. Treatment for depression may take time to work, but it can help reduce symptoms and shorten how long depression lasts.

Your provider may suggest that you see a mental health provider for your care. A mental health provider is a health care professional who specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health problems. If you are already seeing a mental health provider, a depression test may help guide your treatment.

Learn more about laboratory tests, reference ranges, and understanding results.

Is there anything else I need to know about depression screening?
There are many types of mental health providers who treat depression. Your primary health care provider can help you find the right support.

These are some of the professionals who have training to diagnose and treat depression:

Psychiatrists are medical doctors who specialize in mental health. Psychiatrists can prescribe medicine.
Psychologists generally have doctoral degrees, but they do not have medical degrees. They can't prescribe medicine unless they have a special license. Some psychologists work with providers who can prescribe medicine. Psychologists may use one-on-one counseling and/or group therapy sessions.
Psychiatric or mental health nurses are nurses with special training in mental health problems. Nurses who may have a master's or doctoral degree in psychiatric-mental health nursing include, advanced practice registered nurses (APRNs), certified nurse practitioners (CNPs), and clinical nurse specialists (CNSs). In some states, certain nurses can prescribe medicines.
Licensed clinical social workers have at least a master's degree in social work with special training in mental health. They can't prescribe medicine, but they may work with providers who can prescribe medicine. Providers who are licensed clinical social workers usually have LCSW or LICSW after their names.
Licensed professional counselors (LPC) may also be called clinicians or therapists. States have different names of these licenses, such as LMFT (licensed marriage and family therapist). These professionals usually have a master's degree in a field related to mental health. They can't prescribe medicine, but may work with providers who can prescribe.
8 Things To Know About Depression and Complementary Health Approaches
Many people with depression turn to complementary health approaches in addition to or in place of conventional treatment. Research suggests that some approaches may be modestly helpful in reducing depression symptoms. For other approaches, benefits are uncertain or there are safety concerns.

Here are 8 things you should know about complementary health approaches for depression:

Depression can be a serious illness. Don’t use a complementary health approach to replace conventional care or to postpone seeing a health care provider about symptoms of depression. 

Some evidence suggests acupuncture may modestly reduce depression symptoms.

Music therapy may provide short-term benefits for people with depression. 

Studies in adults, adolescents, and children have suggested that yoga may be helpful in reducing depressive symptoms.

It’s uncertain whether omega-3 fatty acid supplements are helpful for symptoms of depression. 

Some research on the herb St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum) has suggested that it may be helpful for depression symptoms, but not all studies agree. There’s an important concern about the safety of St. John’s wort: it can interact in dangerous, sometimes life-threatening ways with a variety of medicines. 

Current scientific evidence does not support the use of other dietary supplements, including S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAMe) or inositol, for depression.

Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions. 
What are antidepressants?
Antidepressants are prescription medicines to treat depression. Depression is more than feeling a little sad or "blue" for a few days. It's a very common, serious medical illness that affects your mood and general mental health It can make you feel tired, hopeless, worried, or fearful. It can change your thinking, sleeping, and eating. Depression may make some people think about ending their lives.

But antidepressants can help many people who have depression. Researchers think antidepressants may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress.

Are antidepressants used for other conditions?
A health care provider may prescribe antidepressants for anxiety, chronic pain, or insomnia. Sometimes providers also prescribe antidepressants for other conditions.

What are the different types of antidepressants?
There are many types of antidepressants. Each one works differently. Providers usually prescribe newer antidepressants first because they don't cause as many side effects as older types. They also seem to help more kinds of depression and anxiety problems.

Most of the newer antidepressants belong to one of these three groups:

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)
Atypical antidepressants, which are newer antidepressants that don't fit into the other groups
If these antidepressants don't help, your provider might suggest one of the older antidepressants. The older types include tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), tetracyclics, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). Even though these antidepressants may cause more serious side effects, the benefits may outweigh the risks for some people.

Which type of antidepressant is right for me?
Our bodies and brains all work differently. That means one antidepressant won't work for everyone. You may need to try two or more medicines before you find one that works for you.

Your provider will work with you to choose the best option to try first. You'll consider questions such as:

Which symptoms bother you most? Some antidepressants may do a better job helping specific symptoms, such as trouble sleeping.
What other medicines and supplements do you take? Some antidepressants can cause problems if you take them with certain medicines and herbs.
Did a certain antidepressant work well for a close relative? An antidepressant that helped a parent, brother, or sister could be a good choice for you, too.
Do you have other health conditions? Certain antidepressants can make some other conditions better or worse. Any other conditions that you have will be part of choosing your depression treatment.
Are you pregnant, planning for pregnancy, or breastfeeding? If so, your provider will help you find a way to treat your depression that's safe for you and your baby.
How long do antidepressants take to work?
Antidepressants usually take 4 to 8 weeks to work, so you'll need to be patient. You may notice that some problems, such as sleeping and eating, get better before your mood improves. That's a good sign. You may just need to give the medicine a little more time to do its job.

Sometimes an antidepressant helps at first, but symptoms return while you're still taking it. But there's usually another one you can try. To get more relief from depression, your provider may suggest combining two antidepressants, using another kind of medicine with an antidepressant, or adding talk therapy or other approaches to improve your mental health.

How long will I need to take an antidepressant?
When an antidepressant starts to work, you and your provider can decide how long you need to stay on it. The typical length of treatment is 6 to 12 months, but some people may stay on antidepressants for much longer.

What are the side effects of antidepressants?
Not everyone has side effects from antidepressants. But if you do have them, they're usually mild and may get better over time as your body gets used to the new medicine.

The most common side effects from antidepressants include:

Nausea and vomiting
Weight gain
Diarrhea
Sleepiness
Sexual problems, such as a lack of desire or ability to have sex
When thinking about side effects, it's important to remember that there are also risks from not treating depression. Your provider can help you think through the pros and cons of all your options.

If you have any side effects from antidepressants, your provider may suggest ways to manage them while you wait to see if the antidepressant will work. If the side effects bother you too much, you may need to change antidepressants. But you should never change your dose or stop taking an antidepressant on your own.

If you have serious problems or notice any changes that worry you, such as new or worsening symptoms, unusual changes in your mood, or you start acting differently, call your provider right away.

In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may be more likely to think about hurting or killing themselves when starting antidepressants or when the dose is changed. Get medical help right away if this happens.

What can I do to take antidepressants safely?
Antidepressants are generally safe when you use them correctly:

Tell your provider about everything you take. That includes medicines, herbs, supplements, and over-the-counter medicines you take, such as pain relievers and decongestants. Be honest about recreational drugs and alcohol, too.
Try to get all your medicines from the same pharmacy. That way the pharmacist can warn you and your provider if you take medicines that may cause problems when used together.
Follow all instructions about how to take your medicine.
Talk with your provider if side effects bother you.
Never stop taking antidepressants without your provider's help. Stopping too fast may make depression come back. You could even make your condition worse. To stop antidepressants safely, you need to give your body time to get used to being without the medicine. Your provider can tell you the safest way to go off an antidepressant.
Depression Treatment
Print
Find out if what you are experiencing may be depression. Depression is treatable. Learn about seeking treatment for yourself or a loved one.
On This Page
How Do I Know if I Am Experiencing Depression?
Talking to Your Health Care Provider
Medications
How to Help a Friend or Family Member Experiencing Depression
If you or someone you know is in crisis, tell someone who can help immediately.

Call 911 or go to the nearest hospital emergency department for emergency medical treatment.

Call or text 988, or chat at 988lifeline.org.
988 is confidential, free, and available 24/7/365, connecting those experiencing a mental health, substance use, or suicidal crisis with trained crisis counselors.

National Maternal Mental Health Hotline
24/7, Free, Confidential Hotline for Pregnant and New Moms in English and Spanish
Call or text 1-833-9-HELP4MOMS (1-833-943-5746).

Don’t be alone.
Don’t leave another person alone if he or she is in crisis.

How Do I Know if I Am Experiencing Depression?
The following questions may help you determine if you are experiencing depression.

During the past two weeks, how often have you been bothered by any of the problems listed below?

Little interest or pleasure in doing things?

Not at all.
Several days.
More than half the days.
Nearly every day.

Feeling down, depressed, or hopeless?

Not at all.
Several days.
More than half the days.
Nearly every day.

If you answered “more than half the days” or “nearly every day” to either question, you may be depressed and should seek help from your health care provider. Your provider can help figure out whether you have depression, and he or she can help find the best treatment for you. Depression can be treated with counseling, medications, or both.

Talking to Your Health Care Provider
a healthcare provider talking to a patient
If you think you may be depressed, the first step to seeking treatment is to talk to your health care provider. Remember that depression is not your fault. By asking for support, you are helping yourself and your family. Use a checklist to help you and your provider talk about your experiences.

Ways to begin the conversation include
“I read this information, and it sounds like how I feel. Can you help me find out if I have depression?”
“I don’t feel like myself. Could it be depression?”

In response, your health care provider should

Carefully review your completed checklist.
Ask several more questions about how you are feeling and acting.
Talk with you about treatment options.
Provide the name and number of a mental health specialist for you to visit. You can also visit CDC’s Resources to find help in your area.
After your visit, make sure to follow-up on all referrals and treatment that he or she suggests.

Top of Page
Medications
When discussing medications with your provider, let him or her know if you are pregnant, thinking about becoming pregnant, or breastfeeding. You and your provider can decide if taking medications while pregnant or breastfeeding is right for you. Visit Medications and Pregnancy for more information.

How to Help a Friend or Family Member Experiencing Depression
a woman sitting with and comforting another woman
To support someone who has depression, help her get appropriate diagnosis and treatment. You may need to make an appointment and go with her to see her health care provider. To learn more about supporting a friend or family member with depression, see How Can I Help a Loved One Who Is Depressed? For information about helping a friend or loved one in crisis, see the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline’s Help for Someone Else.

Also, remember that if you know someone who is depressed, it may affect you too, and it is important to take care of yourself as well. For additional resources on depression or postpartum depression, see Resources.

St. John's Wort and Depression: In Depth
What’s the Bottom Line?
How much do we know about St. John’s wort for depression?
We know a fair amount about the short-term effects of St. John’s wort on depression but less about its long-term effects.
What do we know about the effectiveness of St. John’s wort for depression?
St. John’s wort isn’t consistently effective for depression. Do not use it to replace conventional care or to postpone seeing your health care provider.
What do we know about the safety of St. John’s wort for depression?
St. John’s wort limits the effectiveness of many prescription medicines.
Combining St. John’s wort and certain antidepressants can lead to a potentially life-threatening increase in your body’s levels of serotonin, a chemical produced by nerve cells.
Don’t try to treat depression on your own. Depression can become severe if you don’t get effective, professional help. For some people, depression can increase the risk of suicide. Talk to your health care provider if you or someone you know may be depressed.
About St. John’s Wort
St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum), a plant that grows in the wild, has been used for centuries for mental health conditions. It’s widely prescribed for depression in Europe.
St. John’s wort is sold as a dietary supplement in the United States, where the standards for selling supplements are less strict than the standards for prescription or over-the-counter drugs.
For more information, see the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) Web page about St. John’s wort.

About  Depression
Depression (major depressive disorder or clinical depression) is a common but serious mood disorder. It causes severe symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. In 2015, almost 7 percent of U.S. adults had at least one episode of major depression in the past year. Symptoms of depression vary but can include

Feeling sad or anxious often or all the time
Not wanting to do activities that used to be fun
Feeling irritable‚ easily frustrated‚ or restless
Having problems with sleep and feeling tired
Eating more or less than usual or having no appetite
Experiencing pain that doesn’t improve with treatment
Having trouble concentrating, remembering details, or making decisions
Feeling guilty, worthless, or helpless
Thinking about suicide or hurting yourself.
Antidepressants and certain types of psychotherapy help treat depression.

For more information on depression, visit the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) webpage on depression.

What the Science Says About the Effectiveness of St.  John’s Wort for  Depression
The results of studies on the effectiveness of St. John’s wort for depression are mixed.

In a 12-week, 2011 clinical trial with 73 participants, neither St. John’s wort nor a standard antidepressant medication called citalopram, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI), decreased symptoms of minor depression better than a placebo. The study was funded by NCCIH and NIMH.
In a 26-week clinical trial with 124 participants, St. John’s wort, a standard antidepressant (sertraline, an SSRI), and a placebo were similarly effective in treating major depression of moderate severity. NCCIH and NIMH funded this 2012 analysis of data collected in 2002.
A 2008 review of 29 international studies suggested that St. John’s wort may be better than a placebo and as effective as different standard prescription antidepressants for major depression of mild to moderate severity. St. John’s wort also appeared to have fewer side effects than standard antidepressants. The studies conducted in German-speaking countries—where St. John’s wort has a long history of use by medical professionals—reported more positive results than those done in other countries, including the United States.
St. John’s wort was no more effective than placebo in treating major depression of moderate severity, an NCCIH- and NIMH-funded study of 340 participants reported in 2002.
The Placebo Effect
What the Science Says About the Safety and Side Effects of St. John’s Wort for Depression
Combining St. John’s wort with certain antidepressants can lead to a potentially life-threatening increase of serotonin, a brain chemical targeted by antidepressants. Symptoms occur within minutes to hours, and may include agitation, diarrhea, fast heartbeat, high blood pressure, hallucinations, increased body temperature, and more.
There are case reports of St. John’s wort having dangerous side effects, such as worsening of psychotic symptoms in people with bipolar disorder or schizophrenia.
Taking St.  John’s wort can weaken many prescription medicines, such as:
Antidepressants
Birth control  pills
Cyclosporine, used to prevent the body from rejecting transplanted  organs
Digoxin, a heart  medication
Oxycodone, a pain medicine
Some HIV drugs, including indinavir
Some cancer medications, including irinotecan
Warfarin, an anticoagulant (blood thinner).
Other side effects of St. John’s wort are usually minor and uncommon. They may include upset stomach, dry mouth, headache, fatigue, dizziness, confusion, sexual dysfunction, or sensitivity to sunlight. Also, St. John’s wort is a stimulant and may worsen feelings of anxiety in some people.
NCCIH-Funded Research
NCCIH is studying the potential drug interactions of different herbs, including St. John’s wort.

More To Consider
Depression can be a serious illness and lead to an increased risk of suicide. If you or someone you know may have depression, talk to a health care provider. Don’t try to treat depression on your own.
Do not use St. John’s wort to replace conventional care or to postpone seeing a health care provider about a mental health problem.
Dietary supplements can cause medical problems if you use them incorrectly or in large amounts. Some may interact with medications you take. Your health care provider can advise you.
Many dietary supplements haven’t been tested in pregnant women, nursing mothers, or children. We have little safety information on St. John’s wort for pregnant women or children. Talk with health care providers if you’re pregnant or nursing or are considering giving a dietary supplement to a child. To learn more, see NCCIH’s fact sheet Using Dietary Supplements Wisely.
Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions.
Professional therapy and counseling can improve your mental wellness. This therapy can help people who are experiencing emotional or behavioral problems. Also, it can help people who have a mental health disorder. Therapy is sometimes called psychotherapy or talk therapy. Many times, therapy is used in combination with prescription medicine to treat a mental health disorder. Therapy will usually improve the results you get from the medicine.

There are different types of mental health providers. Professionals trained in psychotherapy include those representing the following types:

Psychiatry
Clinical psychology
Mental health counseling
Clinical social work
Marriage and family therapy
Rehabilitation counseling
Psychoanalysis
Fee structures and access to prescriptions is different for each. For example, a psychiatrist has a medical degree and is allowed to write prescriptions. A counselor does not have a medical degree and is not allowed to write a prescription. Your doctor can suggest a professional that is right for you.

Some people do not want professional therapy or counseling. They feel ashamed of their problems. Others believe therapy and counseling are for seriously mentally ill or “crazy” people. However, this is not true. Don’t let shame and fear stop you from getting the help you need. Good mental health is part of your overall health and wellness.

Path to improved health
Different types of therapy use different techniques. In most types of therapy and counseling, the person receiving treatment talks with a professional therapist. However, therapy is more than just talking about your problems. Therapy can teach you new ways to think about the situations that bother you. It can help you cope with feelings and situations. It can help with feelings of anger, fear, anxiety, shyness, and panic. It also can give you tools to help fight low self-esteem and depression.

Therapy can help treat a variety of problems. Some common reasons people seek therapy include:

Depression
Marriage problems, infidelity, divorce, or other relationship issues
Sexual problems
Stress and anxiety
Addictions and compulsions
Grief, loss, or bereavement
Anger
Career choice
Parenting or family problems
Phobias
Insomnia
Fertility issues
Chronic pain or illness
Domestic violence or abuse
Eating disorders
If you are not sure if therapy and counseling are right for you, talk to your family doctor. Your doctor can refer you to a trained professional who can help with your problems.

If you choose therapy or counseling, you’ll talk about any problems you’ve been having and how you’ve been feeling. You’ll also talk about your goals for therapy. You and your doctor will decide how frequently you will meet. Your doctor, therapist, or counselor will help you decide what’s right for you.

Things to consider
Different kinds of therapy and counseling are based on different ideas about how the brain works. Also, it considers what causes people to act in certain ways. Many therapists use more than one type of technique to help you. Common kinds of therapy include:

Family counseling. This helps family members understand problems within the family and how to resolve them.
Cognitive therapy. This is sometimes called cognitive behavior therapy. It’s based on the idea that your thoughts cause your feelings and actions. If you change the way you think about something, you can feel or behave better even if the situation doesn’t change. This kind of therapy helps you understand negative or false thought patterns. Negative thought patterns cause troubling feelings and behavior.
Behavior therapy. Sometimes called behavior modification therapy, this treatment focuses on changing unwanted or unhealthy behaviors. You replace them with healthy ones. This treatment involves using a system of rewards and reinforcement of positive behavior.
Psychoanalytic therapy. This type of treatment encourages you to think and talk about memories and feelings from the past. These memories will help you understand how you act and feel today.
Group therapy. Group therapy is led by a qualified professional. He or she facilitates a small group of people who have similar issues or problems. Groups can improve honesty with others. Members support each other during times of crisis.
Couples therapy or marriage counseling. This treatment can help couples solve problems together, communicate in healthier ways, and learn to work out differences.
Questions to ask your doctor
What if my partner or child is resistant to therapy?
How do I find a therapist that’s right for me?
Can my child’s therapist tell me what they talked about?
Will my therapist recommend prescription medicine?
When Sadness Lingers
Understanding and Treating Depression

En españolSend us your comments(link sends e-mail)
A person looking sad and staring out of the window
It’s normal to feel sad, down, or low at times. But these feelings can sometimes linger. They can get worse, too, eventually making it hard to do basic daily tasks. If you’ve had a depressed mood or a loss of interest or pleasure in most activities for at least two weeks, you may be experiencing depression.

Depression is a serious disorder. “It’s not something that you can just ‘push through,’ or get through without help,” says Dr. Kymberly Young, a mental health researcher at the University of Pittsburgh.

Depression isn’t caused by a single thing. Some people’s genes put them at risk for depression. Stressful situations may trigger depression. Examples include money problems, the loss of a loved one, or major life changes. Having a serious illness like cancer or heart disease can also lead to depression. And depression can make such illnesses worse.

People may experience depression during pregnancy or after giving birth. This is called perinatal depression. Others feel depressed during certain seasons, most often in winter. This is called seasonal affective disorder, or SAD. Regardless of what’s causing depression, treatments are available that can help many people feel better. And researchers are working on new options for those who need them.

Treatment Options
Depression can look different for different people. But there are some common symptoms (see the Wise Choices box). If you think you may be depressed, talk with your health care provider. Some infections or medical conditions can cause similar symptoms. Your provider can perform a physical exam and blood tests to look for possible causes.

If you have mild depression, your provider may recommend you first try counseling or talk therapy. “Therapy helps people learn how to get out of a hopeless state by viewing the world and themselves differently,” says Dr. Michelle Craske, who studies depression at the University of California, Los Angeles.

Some lifestyle changes may help you feel better during treatment. Try to get some physical activity every day and eat regular, healthy meals. Avoid alcohol, nicotine, and drugs. Keep a regular sleep schedule. And stay connected to people who support you.

People with more severe depression may benefit from medication as well as therapy. “We have drugs that, in many people, work really well,” says Dr. Todd Gould, who tests new treatments for depression at the University of Maryland School of Medicine. Depression-fighting drugs and therapy sometimes work better together.

However, these drugs, called antidepressants, can take many weeks to start working. And there’s no way to know if they’ll work ahead of time. You may have to try more than one drug, or a combination of drugs, to find something that will work for you. For some people, these types of drugs can have serious side effects that may require close monitoring.

Persistent Depression
For certain people, depression persists despite counseling and medication. This is called treatment-resistant depression.

Brain stimulation therapies may help some people with treatment-resistant depression. These use electricity or magnets to directly change brain activity.

For people who don’t feel better after trying at least two standard drugs, a drug called ketamine may be an option. Ketamine is usually injected into a vein. A type of ketamine that’s been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to treat depression, called esketamine, is sprayed into the nose.

“There are two exciting aspects of ketamine treatment,” says Gould. “One is that it’s fast acting.” It can make people feel better within hours. “The other is that it works in some people who don’t respond to any other medications.”

The downside of ketamine treatment is its side effects, Gould says. You may feel strange, woozy, or spacey during treatment. Some people can even experience dissociation, which is an out-of-body experience.

Gould is testing compounds made by the body when it breaks down ketamine as potential new treatments. “Our hope is that these compounds will have the same rapid antidepressant effect that ketamine does, but without the side effects,” he says.

Testing New Therapies
Researchers have also been working on new types of talk therapy for depression. Craske’s team is testing a type of therapy designed to help people focus on joy, excitement, and other positive moods.

“Standard treatments are better at reducing negative emotions than increasing positive emotions,” she says. But people with depression often have the most trouble feeling positive things.

“We’re trying to build your capacity to focus on and appreciate positive parts of your life,” Craske says. “And in our early studies it’s been remarkably effective.”

Young and her team are using a technique called neurofeedback to help people with depression try to enjoy positive emotions and memories. The technique teaches people to directly control activity in different parts of their brain.

“Activity in certain brain areas is what allows you to use positive memories in a healthy way,” Young says. Real-time imaging lets you watch blood flow to different brain areas. “We then teach you to make part of the brain more active when you’re recalling positive memories.” This activity makes the memories feel positive.

Craske and others are also interested in preventing depression before it develops. “That would mean starting at a very young age. But preventing the onset of depressed mood would have far more impact than treatment,” she says.

Studies suggest that teaching skills like mindfulness may help prevent depression in kids at high risk. Mindfulness helps you focus on the present and on what’s going on inside and around you without judgment. Craske’s team is testing an app to teach teens such skills to manage intense negative emotions.

If you’re struggling with depression, don’t be ashamed or embarrassed to seek help, says Young. “We’ve moved past the days of ‘we don’t talk about depression.’”
Depression: Supporting a family member or friend
Help a family member or friend dealing with depression get treatment and find resources.

By Mayo Clinic Staff
Helping someone with depression can be a challenge. If someone you know has depression, you may feel helpless and wonder what to do. Learn how to support and understand them and help them get the resources they need.

The more you learn about depression, how it affects people and how it can be treated, the better you'll be able help someone else.

Here's what you can do.

Depression symptoms vary from person to person. They can include:

Feelings of sadness, tearfulness, emptiness or hopelessness.
Angry outbursts, irritability or frustration, even over small matters.
Loss of interest or pleasure in most or all normal activities, such as sex, hobbies or sports.
Sleeping too little or too much.
Tiredness and lack of energy, so even small tasks take extra effort.
Reduced appetite and weight loss or increased appetite and weight gain.
Physical problems that can't be explained, such as back pain or headaches.
Anxiety, restlessness or nervousness.
Slowed thinking, speaking or body movements.
Feelings of worthlessness or guilt, focusing on past failures, or blaming yourself for things that aren't your responsibility.
Trouble thinking, concentrating, making decisions and remembering things.
Frequent or repeated mention of not wanting to live, suicidal thoughts, suicide attempts or suicide.
For many people with depression, symptoms can affect daily activities at work or school. Depression also can affect social activities and relationships with others. Other people may feel generally miserable or unhappy without knowing why. Children and teens may show depression by being cranky rather than sad.

People with depression may not know or admit that they're depressed. They may not be aware of the symptoms of depression, so they may think their feelings are normal.

People often feel ashamed about their depression, mistakenly believing they should be able to overcome it with willpower alone. But depression seldom gets better without treatment and may get worse. With the right treatment, it can get better.

Here's what you can do to help:

Talk to the person about what you've seen and why you're worried about it.
Explain that depression is a health condition — not a personal flaw or weakness — and it usually gets better with treatment.
Suggest seeking help from a professional. A health care provider is a good place to start. You also could see a mental health provider, such as a licensed counselor or psychologist.
Offer to help prepare a list of questions to discuss in the first appointment with a health care provider or mental health provider.
Express your willingness to help by setting up appointments, going along to them and attending family therapy sessions.
If a person's depression is severe or potentially life-threatening, contact a health care provider, a mental health provider or emergency medical services.

People may experience depression in different ways. Learn how depression affects a person by watching them. Learn what to do when it gets worse.

Consider these issues:

What are the typical signs of depression?
What behaviors or language do you see when depression is worse?
What behaviors or language do you see when this person is doing well?
What triggers bouts of more severe depression?
What activities help most when depression worsens?
Worsening depression needs to be treated as soon as possible. Urge a person with depression to work with a health care provider or mental health provider to create a plan for what to do when symptoms reach a certain point, including whom to contact. In some cases, the provider may need to adjust or change medicines or recommend additional treatments.

People with depression are at an increased risk of suicide. If a person is severely depressed, they may feel suicidal at some point. Take all signs of suicidal behavior seriously and act immediately.

Take action if needed:

Tell the person why you're worried. Ask if they're thinking about suicide or have a plan for how to do it. Having a plan means it's more likely they'll attempt suicide.
Seek help. Contact the person's health care provider, mental health provider or another health care professional. Let other family members or close friends know what's going on.
Contact a suicide hotline. Ask for advice and what resources are in your area. Or urge the person at risk to contact a hotline for counseling.
In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline. It's available 24 hours a day, every day. Or use the Lifeline Chat. Services are free and private.
U.S. veterans or service members who are in crisis can call 988 and then press "1" for the Veterans Crisis Line. Or text 838255. Or chat online.
The Suicide & Crisis Lifeline in the U.S. has a Spanish-language phone line at 1-888-628-9454 (toll-free).
Make sure the person is safe. If possible, get rid of things that could be used to attempt suicide. For example, remove or lock up firearms, other weapons and medicines.
Call 911 or your local emergency number right away if a person could harm themselves or attempt suicide. Make sure someone stays with the person at all times.
Learn and stay alert for common warning signs of suicide or suicidal thoughts:

Talking about suicide — for example, making statements such as "I'm going to kill myself," "I wish I were dead" or "I wish I hadn't been born."
Getting the means to attempt suicide, such as buying a gun or stockpiling pills.
Withdrawing from social contact and wanting to be left alone.
Having mood swings, such as being emotionally high one day and deeply discouraged and irritable the next.
Being lost in thought about death, dying or violence.
Feeling trapped or hopeless about a situation.
Increasing the use of alcohol or drugs.
Changing the normal routine, including eating or sleeping patterns.
Doing risky or self-destructive things, such as using drugs or driving recklessly.
Giving away belongings or getting affairs in order when there's no reason to do this.
Saying goodbye to people as if they won't be seen again.
Having personality changes or being severely anxious or upset, particularly with some of the warning signs above.
Remember that depression isn't anyone's fault. You can't fix someone's depression, but your support and understanding can help.

You can:

Urge the person to stay with treatment. If someone is in treatment for depression, help them remember to take prescriptions and keep appointments.
Be willing to listen. Let them know that you want to learn how they feel. When they want to talk, listen carefully. But don't give advice or opinions and don't judge them. Just listening and being understanding can be powerful healing tools.
Give positive reinforcement. People with depression may judge themselves harshly and find fault with everything they do. Remind them about their positive qualities and how much they mean to you and others.
Offer help. A person may not be able to take care of certain tasks well. Suggest specific tasks you'd be willing to do. Also, ask if you can take on a particular task.
Help make their life less stressful. Creating a regular routine may help a person with depression feel more in control. Offer to make a schedule for meals, medicine, physical activity, social support and sleep, and help organize household chores.
Find helpful organizations. Many organizations offer support groups, counseling and other services for depression. For example, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, as well as employee assistance programs and many faith-based organizations, offer help for mental health concerns.
Urge them to take an active part in their faith, if faith is a part of their life. For many people, faith is an important part of recovery from depression — whether it's taking part in an organized religious community or personal spiritual beliefs and practices.
Urge the person to take self-care steps. That includes eating healthy meals, getting the right amount of sleep and being physically active.
Make plans together. Ask the person to join you on a walk, see a movie with you, or work with you on a hobby or other activity they enjoyed before. But don't try to force them into doing something.
To keep from burning out:

Ask for help. Caring for someone with depression isn't easy. Ask other relatives or friends to help. Tell them what you need.
Take steps to stay healthy. Find time for yourself. Do what you enjoy, stay physically active, check in with friends and renew your spirit.
Be patient. Depression symptoms improve with treatment, but it can take time. Finding the best treatment may require trying more than one type of medicine or treatment approach. For some people, symptoms quickly improve after starting treatment. For others, it will take longer.
Understanding the relationship between migraine and mental health
Migraine is linked to both depression and anxiety. In fact, people with migraine are about five times more likely to develop depression than someone without migraine, according to Dawn Buse, PhD, the director of behavioral medicine at the Montefiore Headache Center and an associate professor in the Department of Neurology at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York.

“It’s very logical when you’re living with a chronic disease like migraine, which is affecting your life in such a big way, that you’re going to feel sad, down and frustrated about how it’s affecting your life,” she says.

Buse says that about 20% of people with episodic migraine—headaches on 14 or fewer days per month—may also have depression, and that number goes up as the number of headache attack days per month increases. Similarly, about 20% of people with episodic migraine have anxiety, and between 30% and 50% of people with chronic migraine also have anxiety.



What’s the link?
Does migraine cause anxiety? Can depression cause migraines? Buse says that doctors aren’t entirely sure what the connection is. For many people, depression or anxiety begins months or years after their migraines start—partially because migraine can be so debilitating. Many others, however, develop migraine after living with depression or anxiety for some time. This indicates that depression and anxiety are not always a response to living with migraine. Like migraine, depression and anxiety can also run in families.

“We think there might be some underlying reason, maybe a genetic reason, or the fact that both depression and migraine act off similar biochemicals in the brain and in the body that predisposes someone to have one, and then the second,” Buse says.

Symptoms
Common symptoms of anxiety, like excessive worry, fear and irritability, can play off of migraine symptoms. Patients worry about when the next attack will come, feel helpless about the unpredictability of their symptoms, and feel frustration over the many ways that migraine is affecting their life.

When a person doesn’t know when the next attack is coming, it can cause a great deal of migraine anxiety, and, ultimately, depression. Symptoms of depression include fatigue, loss of interest or pleasure in things previously enjoyed, changes in sleep, changes in eating habits, and feelings of sadness and hopelessness, which also closely mirror common migraine symptoms like insomnia, loss of appetite and malaise.

Suicide
Both depression and anxiety disorders increase the risk of suicide. Warning signs of suicide include:

Talking or writing about death
Giving away important possessions
Talking about feeling like a burden to other people
Increased use of alcohol or drugs
Reckless behavior
Extreme social withdrawal or isolation
Making calls or visits to others to say goodbye
Thoughts of hopelessness (that things will never get better in the future)
*If you or someone you know has serious thoughts about suicide, share your concerns openly with your healthcare professional or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1(800) 273-8255. Depression is rarely permanent, and many effective treatment options are available.

Treatment options
The silver lining, Buse says, is that depression and anxiety are treatable in many ways, including through medications that target nerve transmitters. But there are also nonpharmacological therapies.

Treatments that include cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) help us better manage stress and change the ways that we think and act, which could be contributing to our feelings of depression and anxiety, says Buse.

Relaxation therapies are similarly effective for some in treating anxiety and depression, as well as combating stress, which can exacerbate migraine symptoms. These strategies involve calming the nervous system with meditative exercises like deep breathing or guided visual imagery.

Buse also recommends biofeedback, where patients are connected to a machine that measures different physiological responses and compares them alongside biological information.

“In biofeedback, you can actually look at a computer screen and see when your nervous system is activated,” she says. This is helpful for anxiety, especially panic attacks or generalized anxiety, as well as insomnia and worry. There is very good evidence for these strategies helping with migraine management, Buse says.

Staying active and healthy is also important for patients who experience migraines and depression or anxiety, as is maintaining a consistent sleep schedule.

Keep making plans
One of Buse’s key pieces of advice is not to withdraw and let migraine keep you from being social.

“Keep in contact with friends and family,” Buse says. “You may have to cancel sometimes, you may have to leave early, or you may need to excuse yourself and go in a dark, quiet room. But don’t stop making plans, because when you start to isolate, you get lonely and depressed, and then you can really enter a downward spiral.”

More than anything, it’s important to remember that migraine and anxiety or depression are is not the fault of the patient, and that there are treatment options.

“We want to let patients know that improving and lifting their depression and anxiety conditions will also lead to better migraine outcomes, improving their entire quality of life and reducing disability,” she says.
General information about depression
KEY POINTS
Depression is different from normal sadness.
Depression can be treated.
Some people with cancer may have a higher risk of depression.
There are many medical conditions that can cause depression.
Family members of people with cancer are also at risk of depression.
Depression is different from normal sadness.
Depression is more than feeling down or sad from time to time. It is a medical problem marked by ongoing feelings of sadness, despair, loss of energy, and difficulty dealing with daily life. If you have these feelings most of the day for longer than 2 weeks, it may be a sign of major depression.

Other symptoms of major depression include

loss of pleasure and interest in activities you used to enjoy
changes in eating and sleeping habits
slow physical and mental responses
feeling restless or jittery
unexplained tiredness
feeling worthless, hopeless, or helpless
feeling a lot of guilt for no reason
not being able to pay attention
thinking the same thoughts over and over
frequent thoughts of death or suicide
People diagnosed with cancer may also have other symptoms of depression, such as

feelings of disbelief or denial
anxiety or worry about the future
grief
Symptoms of depression are not the same for every person.

Depression can be treated.
It's important to know that help is available for people with depression. Tell your health care team how you are feeling and discuss your treatment options with them. Getting the help you need is important for your life and your health.

If you have thoughts of suicide, dial 911 in an emergency or call, text, or chat 988 to reach the 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline. Counselors are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, including for people who are deaf or hard of hearing.

Some people with cancer may have a higher risk of depression.
A person diagnosed with cancer faces many stressful issues, which may increase the risk of depression. These may include

being confronted with our mortality
changes in life plans
changes in body image and self-esteem
changes in day-to-day living
worry about money and legal issues
About 2 out of every 10 people diagnosed with cancer become depressed. The number of men and women affected are about the same.

Certain risk factors may increase your chance of developing depression after a cancer diagnosis. Risk factors related to cancer that may cause depression include

learning you have cancer when you are already depressed
having cancer pain that is not well controlled
being physically weakened by the cancer
having pancreatic cancer
having advanced cancer or a poor prognosis
taking certain drugs, such as corticosteroids, procarbazine, L-asparaginase, interferon alfa, interleukin-2, amphotericin B
Risk factors not related to cancer that may cause depression include

a personal history of depression, suicide attempts, or other mental health problems
a family history of depression or suicide
a personal history of alcoholism or drug abuse
lacking support from family or friends
stress caused by life events other than cancer
having other health problems, such as stroke or heart attack that may also cause depression
Not everyone who is diagnosed with cancer reacts in the same way. Some people with cancer may not have depression or anxiety, while others may have major depression or an anxiety disorder. For more information on anxiety disorders, see Adjustment to Cancer: Anxiety and Distress.

There are many medical conditions that can cause depression.
Medical conditions that may cause depression in people with cancer include

pain that doesn't go away with treatment
abnormal levels of calcium, sodium, or potassium in the blood
not enough vitamin B12 or folate in your diet
anemia
fever
too much or too little thyroid hormone
too little adrenal hormone
side effects caused by certain drugs
cancer in the central nervous system
poor sleep
Family members of people with cancer are also at risk of depression.
Anxiety and depression may occur in family members who are caring for loved ones with cancer. Family members who talk about their feelings and solve problems together are less likely to have high levels of depression and anxiety.

If you are a caregiver, watch for signs of depression or anxiety in yourself and talk with your doctor even if you think what you are feeling is normal. It's important that you take care of your own health and seek help when you need it. For more information, see Support for Caregivers of Cancer Patients.

Diagnosis of depression
KEY POINTS
Your health care provider will talk with you to find out if you have symptoms of depression.
Physical exams and lab tests are also used to diagnose depression.
Your health care provider will talk with you to find out if you have symptoms of depression.
Your health care provider may want to discuss the following:

Your feelings about having cancer. Talk with your doctor to see if your feelings are normal sadness or more serious.
Your moods. You may be asked to rate your mood on a scale.
Any symptoms of depression you may have and how long they have lasted.
How the symptoms of depression affect your daily life, such as your relationships, your work, and your ability to enjoy your usual activities.
Other parts of your life that are causing stress.
How strong your social support system is.
A list of the drugs and supplements you are taking and other treatments you are receiving. Sometimes, side effects of drugs or the cancer seem like symptoms of depression. This is more likely during active cancer treatment or if you have advanced cancer.
Your health care team will continue to monitor your symptoms to keep your depression from getting worse.

Physical exams and lab tests are also used to diagnose depression.
In addition to talking with you, your doctor may

ask about your personal and family medical history to learn more about your possible risk factors for depression
do a physical exam to check general signs of health, which can help rule out other causes of your symptoms
run laboratory tests to rule out a medical condition that may be causing symptoms of depression
Treatment of depression
KEY POINTS
The decision to treat depression depends on how long it has lasted and how much it affects your life.
Counseling or talk therapy helps some people with depression.
Physical activity may help relieve depression symptoms.
Antidepressants help some people with depression.
There are different types of antidepressants.
The antidepressant that is best for you depends on several factors.
Your doctor will watch you closely if you need to change your antidepressant.
The decision to treat depression depends on how long it has lasted and how much it affects your life.
You may have depression that needs to be treated if you are not able to perform your usual activities, have severe symptoms, or the symptoms do not go away. Treatment of depression may include talk therapy, medicines, or both.

Counseling or talk therapy helps some people with depression.
Your doctor may suggest you see a psychologist or psychiatrist because

your symptoms have been treated with medicine for 2 to 4 weeks and are not getting better
your depression is getting worse
you are experiencing unwanted side effects from antidepressants
depression keeps you from continuing with your cancer treatment
Most counseling or talk therapy programs for depression are offered in both individual and small-group settings. These programs include crisis intervention, psychotherapy, and cognitive-behavior therapy.

More than one type of therapy program may be right for you. A therapy program can help you learn about

coping and problem-solving skills
relaxation skills and ways to lower stress
ways to get rid of or change negative thoughts
cancer and its treatment
Talking with a clergy member may also be helpful for some people.

Physical activity may help relieve depression symptoms.
Being physically active may help relieve depression and its symptoms. At least 150 minutes of moderate-to-vigorous exercise per week has been shown to reduce depression in breast cancer survivors.

Antidepressants help some people with depression.
Antidepressants may help relieve depression and its symptoms. When you are taking antidepressants, it's important that you use them under the care of a doctor. Some antidepressants take 3 to 6 weeks to work. To avoid side effects, you usually begin at a low dose that is slowly increased to find the right dose for you.

You may be treated with a number of drugs during your cancer care. Some anticancer drugs may not mix safely with certain antidepressants or with certain foods, herbals, or nutritional supplements. It's important to tell your health care providers about all the drugs, herbals, and nutritional supplements you are taking, including drugs used as patches on the skin, and any other diseases, conditions, or symptoms you have. This can help prevent unwanted reactions with your antidepressant.

There are different types of antidepressants.
Most antidepressants help treat depression by changing the levels of chemicals called neurotransmitters in the brain, while some affect cell receptors. Nerves use these chemicals to send messages to one another. Increasing the amount of these chemicals helps to improve mood. The different types of antidepressants act on these chemicals in different ways and have different side effects.

Several types of antidepressants are used to treat depression:

SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) are drugs that stop serotonin (a substance that nerves use to send messages to one another) from being reabsorbed by the nerve cells that make it. This means there is more serotonin for other nerve cells to use. SSRIs include citalopram, escitalopram, and fluoxetine. SSRIs are commonly used antidepressants in people with cancer and work well to treat depression.
SNRIs (serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors) are drugs that stop the brain chemicals serotonin and norepinephrine from being reabsorbed by the nerve cells that make it. This means there is more serotonin and norepinephrine for other nerve cells to use. Some SNRIs may also help relieve neuropathy caused by chemotherapy or hot flashes caused by menopause. SNRIs include venlafaxine, duloxetine, and levomilnacipran.
Tricyclic antidepressants work the same way SNRIs do. Tricyclic antidepressants may be used for depression that does not respond to other types of antidepressants. They can also help relieve headaches, neuropathy caused by chemotherapy, and problems falling or staying asleep. Tricyclic antidepressants include amitriptyline, doxepin, and imipramine.
NDRIs (norepinephrine-dopamine reuptake inhibitors) are drugs that stop the brain chemicals norepinephrine and dopamine from being reabsorbed. This means there is more norepinephrine and dopamine for other nerve cells to use. The only NDRI currently approved to treat depression is bupropion.
Other antidepressants include mirtazapine, trazodone, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors.

Sometimes, other drugs, such as benzodiazepines or psychostimulants, are given along with antidepressants to decrease anxiety or improve energy and concentration.

The antidepressant that is best for you depends on several factors.
Choosing the best antidepressant for you depends on

your symptoms
side effects of the antidepressant
your medical history
other medicines you are taking
how you or your family members responded to antidepressants in the past
the form of medicine you are able to take (such as a pill or a liquid)
You may have to try different treatments to find the one that is right for you.

Your doctor will watch you closely if you need to change your antidepressant.
You may need to change your antidepressant if severe adverse effects occur or your symptoms are not getting better. Check with your doctor before you stop taking an antidepressant. Your doctor will reduce the dose slowly before starting another antidepressant. This is to prevent side effects that can occur if you suddenly stop taking your antidepressant.

Suicide risk in people with cancer
KEY POINTS
People with cancer may feel hopeless at times and think about suicide.
Certain factors may increase the risk of suicidal thoughts in people with cancer.
The health care team will ask if you have thoughts of suicide and help manage the cause of the thoughts.
People with cancer may feel hopeless at times and think about suicide.
Some people with cancer feel hopeless. Talk with your doctor if you feel hopeless. There are ways your doctor can help you.

Feelings of hopelessness may lead to thinking about suicide. If you or someone you know is thinking about suicide, get help as soon as possible. You can get help from the National Suicide Prevention LifelineExit Disclaimer, 1-800-273-TALK (8255). The Lifeline is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The deaf and hard of hearing can contact the TTY Lifeline at 1-800-799-4889. All calls are confidential. More information about depression and suicide prevention is available from the National Institute of Mental Health.

Certain factors may increase the risk of suicidal thoughts in people with cancer.
Some of these risk factors include older age, being male, and

having a personal history of depression, anxiety, or other mental health problem, or suicide attempts
having a family member who has attempted suicide
having a personal history of drug or alcohol abuse
feeling hopeless or that you are a burden to others
lacking support from family and friends
being unable to live a normal, independent life because of problems with day-to-day activities, pain, or other symptoms
being within the first 6 months of your cancer diagnosis
having advanced cancer or a poor prognosis
having cancer of the prostate, lung, head and neck, or pancreas
not getting along well with the treatment team
The health care team will ask if you have thoughts of suicide and help manage the cause of the thoughts.
Talk to your doctor if you have thoughts of hopelessness and are thinking of suicide. You may feel more in control of your emotions once you describe your feelings and fears.

People with cancer may feel desperate to stop any discomfort or pain they have. Keeping pain and other symptoms under control will help to

relieve distress
make you feel more comfortable
prevent thoughts of suicide
Ask your doctor what may be done to help relieve your emotional and physical pain. Treatment may include antidepressants. Some antidepressants take a few weeks to work. The doctor may prescribe other drugs that work quickly to relieve distress until the antidepressant begins to work. For your safety, it's important to have frequent contact with a health care professional and avoid being alone until your symptoms are controlled. Your health care team can help you find social support.

Depression in children
KEY POINTS
Your child will be examined for signs of depression.
The symptoms of depression are not the same in every child.
Treatment may be talk therapy or antidepressants.
Some children have depression or other problems related to cancer.
Most children cope well with cancer. However, a small number of children may have

depression
anxiety
trouble sleeping
problems getting along with family or friends
problems following the treatment plan
These problems can affect the child's cancer treatment and enjoyment of life. They can occur at any time from diagnosis to well after treatment ends. Survivors of childhood cancer who have severe late effects from cancer treatment may be more likely to have symptoms of depression.

A psychologist or psychiatrist can help children with depression.

Your child will be examined for signs of depression.
Your health care team may ask the following questions:

How is your child eating and sleeping?
Is your child more tired than usual?
How has your child coped with past illnesses?
How is your child's behavior at home and at school? Have they had trouble getting along with others or learning?
Does your child have more anger, outbursts, or crying than usual?
Has your child withdrawn from activities they used to enjoy?
The symptoms of depression are not the same in every child.
A diagnosis of depression depends on the symptoms and how long they have lasted. Symptoms of depression in children may include

appetite changes
not sleeping or sleeping too much
feeling very tired or having little energy
being unable to relax and be still (such as pacing, fidgeting, and pulling at clothing)
frequent crying
loss of interest in usual activities
lack of emotion in children younger than 6 years
feelings of worthlessness, blame, or guilt
unable to think or pay attention and frequent daydreaming
trouble learning in school, not getting along with others, and refusing to go to school
frequent thoughts of death or suicide
Treatment may be talk therapy or antidepressants.
Talk therapy is the main treatment for depression in children. The child may talk to the counselor alone or with a small group of other children. Talk therapy may include play therapy for younger children. Therapy will help the child cope with feelings of depression and understand their cancer and treatment.

Antidepressants may be given to children with major depression or anxiety. In some children, teenagers, and young adults, antidepressants may make depression worse or cause thoughts of suicide. The Food and Drug Administration has warned that people younger than age 25 who are taking antidepressants should be watched closely for signs that the depression is getting worse and for suicidal thinking or behavior.

To learn more about depression
For more information from the National Cancer Institute about depression, see

Adjustment to Cancer: Anxiety and Distress
Coping with Advanced Cancer
Emotions and Cancer
For general information about depression and suicide prevention from the National Institute of Mental Health, see

Depression
Suicide Prevention
Psychotherapies (Talk Therapy)
Mental Health Medications
About This PDQ Summary
About PDQ
Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish.

PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research. The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH.

Purpose of This Summary
This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about cancer-related depression and suicide risk in both the adult and the pediatric population. It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care.

Reviewers and Updates
Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change.

The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Supportive and Palliative Care Editorial Board.

Clinical Trial Information
A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment.

Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237).
Introduction
Many people with symptoms of depression don’t describe themselves as feeling depressed. Some people don’t recognize the symptoms in themselves, while others may have a hard time admitting they feel depressed. It can be embarrassing to talk about. An individual may feel like a failure or that people will judge them. But here’s what you need to know: for caregivers, depression is more common than you might think, and it’s a normal response to a difficult situation. It is not unusual for caregivers to develop mild or more serious depression as a result of the constant demands they face while providing care.

Depression is an extremely complex condition with many research studies underway to pinpoint the cause(es). Known contributing factors include genetic characteristics, hormone levels, environmental triggers, certain medications, the effects of living with a major illness, grief and loss due to the the death of a loved one, having experienced physical or emotional abuse, living with someone with serious depression, and other factors. Not everyone will experience the negative feelings that go with depression. But we know that in an effort to provide the best possible care for a family member or friend, caregivers often sacrifice their own physical and emotional needs. The complex and varied aspects involved with providing care can strain even the most capable person. Feelings of overwhelm, agitation, anxiety, distress, pessimism, isolation, exhaustion—and sometimes guilt for having these feelings—can exact a heavy toll.

Everyone has negative thoughts or feelings that come and go over time, but when these feelings become more intense and leave you drained of energy, tearful or irritable towards a loved one, it may well be a warning sign of depression. Concerns about depression arise when the emptiness and crying don’t go away, or when those negative feelings are unrelenting.

Unfortunately, feelings of depression are often seen as a sign of weakness rather than a sign that something is out of balance. Comments from others such as “snap out of it” or “it’s all in your head” are not helpful, and reflect a belief that mental health concerns are not real. Ignoring or denying your feelings will not make them go away.

Early attention to symptoms of depression through exercise, a healthy diet, positive support of family and friends, or consultation with a trained health or mental health professional may help to prevent the development of a more serious depression over time.

Symptoms of Depression
People experience depression in different ways. Some may feel classic symptoms, like sadness and hopelessness. Others may have signs that you might not equate with depression, such as extreme fatigue or irritability. The type and degree of symptoms vary by individual and can change over time. Consider these common symptoms of depression. Have you experienced any of the following for longer than two weeks?

Feeling sad, tearful, empty, hopeless
Changes in eating habits—weight loss and no appetite or cravings with weight gain
Changes in sleep—too much sleep or not enough
Feeling tired all the time, difficulty being motivated to do anything
A loss of interest in people and/or activities that once brought you pleasure
Feeling numb
Becoming easily agitated or angered
Feeling that nothing you do is good enough
Increase in alcohol or drug consumption
Excessive time on the Internet
Trouble focusing, thinking, or planning—as if your head was filled with fog
Neglecting your physical well-being and appearance
Thoughts of running away, or escaping from the situation
Thoughts of death or suicide, ideas of how to end your life
Ongoing physical symptoms that do not respond to treatment, such as headaches, digestive disorders, and chronic neck and back pain
Special Caregiver Concerns
Caring for a person with dementia can be all consuming. Researchers have found that a person who provides care for someone with dementia is twice as likely to suffer from depression as a person providing care for someone without dementia. Not only do caregivers spend significantly more hours per week providing care, they report more employment problems, personal stress, mental and physical health problems, lack of sleep, less time to do the things they enjoy, less time to spend with other family members, and more family conflict than non-dementia caregivers.
As stressful as the deterioration of a loved one’s mental and physical abilities may be for the caregiver, dealing with dementia-related behavior is an even bigger contributor to developing depression. Dementia-related symptoms such as wandering, agitation, hoarding, embarrassing conduct. and resistance or non-cooperation from the loved one makes every day challenging and makes it harder for a caregiver to get rest or assistance in providing care. The more severe the case of dementia, the more likely the caregiver is to experience depression. It is critical for caregivers, especially in these situations, to receive consistent and dependable support and respite.

Women experience depression at a higher rate than men. Women, primarily wives and daughters, provide the majority of caregiving. In the United States, approximately 12 million women experience clinical depression each year, at approximately twice the rate of men. If you think depression is all in your head, think again. Physical factors like menopause, childbirth, PMS, thyroid disease, and nutritional deficiencies in iron, vitamin D, and Omega-3 fatty acids can all cause depression.
A Mental Health America study found that many women do not seek treatment for depression because they are embarrassed or in denial about being depressed. In fact, 41% of women surveyed cited embarrassment or shame as barriers to treatment. Keep in mind that doctors have heard it all. It is important to both your mental and physical health to get a complete physical exam. Take time during the exam to bring up the subject of depression if you suspect you are experiencing symptoms of depression.

Men who are caregivers deal with depression differently. Men are less likely to admit to depression and doctors are less likely to diagnose depression in men. Men will more often “self-treat” their depressive symptoms of anger, irritability, or feelings of powerlessness with alcohol or overwork. Although male caregivers tend to be more willing than female caregivers to hire outside help for assistance with home care duties, they tend to have fewer friends to confide in or positive activities to engage in outside the home. The mistaken assumption that depressive symptoms are a sign of weakness can make it especially difficult for men to seek help.
 
Military and veteran caregivers are at risk of depression. Military and veteran caregivers experience depression nearly twice the rate of non-military caregivers. The more severe the mental and/or physical health conditions of the veteran, the more demands you face as a caregiver. Conditions like dementia, traumatic brain injury, and post-traumatic stress disorder (TBI and PTSD) can be particularly challenging for caregivers. Trying to cope with daily life in addition to watching out for the veteran’s triggers, or helping them cope with their own stress, can lead you to feel overwhelmed and increase feelings of depression, particularly feelings of helplessness and hopelessness. As a military caregiver, you may not have other people in your life who understand the experience of caring for a service member, particularly younger caregivers whose peers are unlikely to be facing the same kinds of challenges. You may have even moved to have better access to VA benefits, or to a region that is more supportive to your veteran’s needs, which can make you feel even more isolated and less likely to have help from people you know and trust. That doesn’t mean help isn’t available. The first step is to talk to your doctor who can refer you to a mental health professional and can prescribe medications as appropriate.
 
Lack of sleep contributes to depression. While sleep needs vary, most people need eight hours a day. Loss of sleep as a result of caring for a loved one can lead to serious depression. The important thing to remember is that even though you may not be able to get your loved one to rest throughout the night, you can arrange to get much needed sleep. Hiring a respite worker or engaging a friend to be with your loved one while you take a nap, finding a day care center, or scheduling a stay over with another family member for a few nights, are a few ways to keep your caregiving commitment while getting the sleep you need.
 
Depression can persist after placement in a care facility. Making the decision to move a loved one to a care center is very stressful. While many caregivers are finally able to catch up on much needed rest, the loneliness, guilt, and monitoring the care a loved one receives in this new location can add new stress. Many caregivers feel depressed at the time of placement and some continue to feel depressed for some time after.
People assume that once caregiving is over, the stress from providing hands-on care will go away. Yet, researchers found that even three years after the death of a spouse with dementia, some former caregivers continued to experience depression and loneliness. In an effort to return their life to normal, former caregivers may need to seek help for depression as well.

What to Do if You Think You Have Depression
Depression deserves to be treated with the same attention afforded any other illness, such as diabetes or high blood pressure. Likewise, the best way to figure out what is causing symptoms is to talk to a qualified professional, like your doctor. If you feel uncomfortable using the term depression, tell your doctor that you are “feeling blue” or “feeling down,” and describe your personal experience and symptoms. The more specific you can be, the better your doctor can help you. The important thing is to make it a priority during your appointment and be as honest as possible so your doctor can help you.

It’s not uncommon for a person receiving care to suffer from undiagnosed depression. Everything can feel worse than it is from their perspective adding to any daily caregiving challenges you may be experiencing. If you suspect this is the case in your caregiving situation, look for an opportunity to share your concern with them. If they are reluctant to talk about it with you, encourage a trusted friend to talk with them or consider leaving a message for their doctor regarding your concern prior to their next appointment.   

How Is Depression Treated?
The first step to getting the best treatment for depression is to meet with a mental health professional such as a psychologist, social worker, or other licensed therapist. At the same time, schedule a physical exam with your doctor. Certain medications, as well as some medical conditions such as viral infection, can cause the same symptoms as depression, and should be evaluated by a physician. The exam should include lab tests and an interview that tests for mental status to determine if speech, memory, or thought patterns have been affected.

Although a physician may prescribe antidepressant medication, medication alone is not the most effective treatment for depression. Concurrent guidance of a mental health professional is strongly recommended. The therapist or counselor will listen to your concerns, screen you for symptoms of depression, and assist you in developing ways to address your stress and build new coping patterns.

One way to find a professional is to ask a friend for the name of someone they know and trust. You may also find someone by asking your minister or rabbi, your doctor, or if you are employed, you may check your employer’s health insurance provider list or Employee Assistance Program (EAP). In addition, national organizations can provide contact information for mental health professionals in your community. (See “Finding a Professional in Your Area” in this fact sheet.)

It is important to trust and feel comfortable with the professional you see. It is not uncommon to request a free introductory phone or in-person meeting to help determine if the professional is the right match for your particular needs and style. It is appropriate to clarify:

What the cost will be
How much your insurance will pay
How many scheduled sessions you should expect to have with the mental health therapist
 Any treatment should be evaluated regularly to ensure that it continues to contribute towards your improved health and growth.

Treatment Options
Upon review of a physical and mental health evaluation, a course of treatment may be recommended. Primary treatment options are psychotherapy (also referred to as mental health therapy and talk therapy) and antidepressant medication. These treatments may be used alone or in combination with one another. The most frequent treatment for depressive symptoms that have progressed beyond the mild stage is antidepressant medication, which provides relatively quick symptom relief. Critical to treatment for depression is the concurrent use of psychotherapy along with medication. Discussing your situation with a therapist can open up new self-awareness for addressing a particular emotional concern and provide guidance to address challenges in getting and staying healthy.

When choosing a therapist, be sure to ask about their experience working with family caregivers and their understanding of caregiving-related stressors.

If drug therapy is recommended, a certain amount of trial and error is necessary to find the right type and dosage of medication for each individual, and it may take several weeks before effects are felt. Good communication between patient and doctor is important. Older adults should be especially careful to watch for medication side effects caused from too high a dosage or interactions with other medications.

Complementary and Alternative Therapies
Many complementary medicines and alternative therapies are promoted for coping with depression. Some have been tested in scientific clinical trials, but many have not. Here is an overview of some of the most common therapies:

Physical Exercise: Exercise has been found to reduce the effects of depression. Walking three times a week for 30 to 45 minutes has been linked to reducing or alleviating symptoms of depression. If that seems like a lot of time you don’t have, then start with 15 minutes once a week. The important message is to get started with a regular exercise activity.

It is unknown whether physical activity prevents the onset of depression or just helps modify the effects. Arranging time for exercise is sometimes difficult for caregivers. It is often seen as a “value added” activity—something to do when everything else is done. You might consider adding it to your “to do” list, asking a friend to give you a “walk date” each week as a gift, or requesting that your doctor write a prescription for walking or joining an exercise class. All the research shows that for a healthier life, it makes good sense to make time for exercise.

Mind-Body Techniques: There is a growing body of research showing that our thoughts, beliefs, and feelings can have a direct impact on our health, and our physical health can impact our mental state. Your mind and body are interrelated. Implementing mind-body techniques into your routine may help alleviate depression.

Even 5 to 10 minutes of any of these techniques may be beneficial. These are some to try:

Meditation
Prayer
Deep breathing
Acupuncture
Yoga
Massage
Listening to music
Creating art
Guided imagery
Journaling
Supplements: Herbal “over-the-counter” treatments such as St. John’s Wart (Hypericum perforatum) and other supplements such as SAMe and omega-3 fatty acids are under study and/or in popular use in the US and Europe for treating depressive symptoms. At present, for nonprescription drugs in the US, there are no established criteria for determining the amount of active ingredient a company puts in their product or what dose is right for a given person. Effectiveness of a product is difficult to determine, and the effects of a product can have negative side effects. For example, the US Food and Drug Administration issued a warning stating that St. John’s wort may affect the metabolic pathway used by many prescription drugs prescribed to treat a number of conditions, including heart disease, depression, and HIV infections.

If you are taking any herbal supplements or considering taking them, talk with your health care provider to ensure they will not interfere with any other treatment you are receiving.

Light Therapy: Caregivers who feel “the blues” when confined indoors or in response to winter’s gray days may suffer from Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD), also referred to as “winter depression.” As seasons change, there is a shift in our biological internal clocks or circadian rhythms, partly in response to the changes in sunlight patterns. This can cause our biological clocks to be out of sync with our daily schedules. People with SAD have a difficult time adjusting to the shortage of sunlight in the winter months. SAD symptoms are most pronounced in January and February, when the days are shortest. SAD is often misdiagnosed as hypothyroidism, hypoglycemia, infectious mononucleosis, and other viral infections.

Light therapy, using specially designed bright fluorescent lights, has been shown to reverse SAD’s depressive symptoms. Experts believe that the light therapy works by altering the levels of certain brain chemicals, specifically melatonin. Antidepressant medication along with other treatments, including exercise, may be helpful as well. If you experience mild depressive symptoms seasonally, experiment with increasing the light in your surroundings, using lamps or other sources. If the symptoms are strong enough to impair your day-to-day functioning, seek out a mental health professional with expertise in treating SAD.

Paying for Treatment
Private health insurance and Medicare may pay for some mental health care, and the Affordable Care Act (ACA) has increased insurance coverage for mental health benefits. Policies vary widely, so it’s best to call the mental health professional directly to find out if they accept your insurance for payment. Health insurance providers will usually list mental health professionals in the same insurance material that lists health plan medical doctors. Medicare recipients will find the booklet titled, “Medicare and Your Mental Health Benefits” a helpful source of information. See the Resources section of this fact sheet to find out how to obtain a copy.

The “covered services” of the insurance plan will specify mental health coverage for inpatient (hospital, treatment center) and outpatient (professional’s office) care, how many visits are paid for, and at what rate of reimbursement. Employed caregivers may also have access to an Employee Assistance Program, where licensed professionals (usually psychologists and social workers) are available for confidential sessions to discuss personal or professional problems.

Professionals who don’t accept insurance are called “out-of-network providers,” and they may be able to provide you with a receipt that you can submit to your insurance for partial reimbursement. Check with the professional to see if this is an option. If so, you’ll have to contact your insurance company to make sure they’ll cover some of the cost. They may require you to meet a deductible before they will start paying.

Caregivers without health insurance or who pay out-of-pocket for care will find that fees vary by professional and region, with psychiatrists and psychologists charging at the higher end of the fee scale, and therapists and social workers offering services at a more moderate rate. Some professionals offer a sliding scale fee, meaning they may slide their fee down to meet your need. There may also be low-fee clinics that have a set low fee or will apply a fee based on your ability to pay. In these settings, you are often meeting with a mental health intern who is being supervised by a licensed mental health provider. In any case, find out what the fee is up front to avoid any misunderstandings later on.

Strategies to Help Yourself
Depressive disorders can make one feel exhausted, helpless, and hopeless. Such negative thoughts and feelings make some people feel like giving up. It is important to realize that these negative views are part of the depression and may not accurately reflect the situation. Below are guidelines adapted from the National Institute of Mental Health offering recommendations for dealing with depression. Set realistic goals in light of the depression. You may not be able to accomplish as much as you are accustomed to when you are feeling well.

Break large tasks into small ones, set some priorities, and do what you can as you can.
Try to be with other people and to confide in someone you know and trust; it is often better than suffering alone.
Participate in activities that may make you feel better, such as exercise, going to a movie or ballgame, or attending a religious, social, or community event.
Expect your mood to improve gradually, not immediately. Feeling better takes time.
It is advisable to postpone important decisions until the depression has lifted. Before deciding to make a significant transition—change jobs, get married or divorced—discuss it with others who know you well and can offer another view of your situation.
People rarely “snap out of” a depression. People who expect you to do this are misguided in their understanding of your condition.
Remember, positive thinking and the practice of new coping patterns will replace the negative thinking that is part of the depression. The negative thinking will be reduced as your depression responds to treatment.
Say “yes” to offers of help and engagement by family and friends who you know and trust.
Direct assistance in providing care for your loved one, such as respite care relief, as well as positive feedback from others, positive self-talk, and recreational activities are linked to lower levels of depression. Look for classes and support groups available through caregiver support organizations to help you learn or practice effective problem-solving and coping strategies needed for caregiving. For your health and the health of those around you, take some time to care for yourself.
Depression in The Workplace
Depression In The Workplace
Clinical depression has become one of America's most costly illnesses. Left untreated, depression is as costly as heart disease or AIDS to the US economy, costing over $51 billion in absenteeism from work and lost productivity and $26 billion in direct treatment costs. Depression tends to affect people in their prime working years and may last a lifetime if untreated. More than 80 percent of people with clinical depression can be successfully treated. With early recognition, intervention, and support, most employees can overcome clinical depression and pick up where they left off.

Know The Facts
Depression ranks among the top three workplace problems for employee assistance professionals, following only family crisis and stressii.
3% of total short term disability days are due to depressive disorders and in 76% of those cases, the employee was femaleiii.
In a study of First Chicago Corporations, depressive disorders accounted for more than half of all medical plan dollars paid for mental health problems. The amount for treatment of these claims was close to the amount spent on treatment for heart diseaseiv.
The annual economic cost of depression in 1995 was $600 per depressed worker. Nearly one-third of these costs are for treatment and 72% are costs related to absenteeism and lost productivity at workv.
Almost 15% of those suffering from severe depression will die by suicidevi.
Employees' Attitudes Towards Depression
Often times a depressed employee will not seek treatment because they fear the effect it will have on their job and they are concerned about confidentiality.
Many employees are also unaware they have depression or they fear their insurance is inadequate to cover costs.
Most employers will refer a depressed employee for help if they are aware of the symptoms. 64% of NMHA Survey respondents said they would refer an employee to an EAP health professional vii.
Learn To Recognize The Symptoms Of Clinical Depression
No two people experience clinical depression in the same manner. Symptoms will vary in severity and duration among different people. Take a depression screening. See your doctor* if you experience five or more of the following symptoms for more than two weeks:

Persistent sad, anxious, or "empty" mood.
Sleeping too little, early morning awakening, or sleeping too much.
Reduced appetite and/or weight loss, or increased appetite and weight gain.
Loss of interest in activities once enjoyed, including sex.
Restlessness, irritability.
Persistent physical symptoms that don't respond to treatment (such as headaches, chronic pain or digestive disorders).
Difficulty concentrating, remembering, or making decisions.
Fatigue or loss of energy.
Feeling guilty, hopeless or worthless.
Thoughts of suicide or death.
* As a first step, a thorough physical examination may be recommended to rule out other illnesses.

Help Is Available
If you think you might be strugglng with a mental health condition, take a screening and get connected to supports.

To learn more visit our resources on: workplace wellness, depression, mental health treatment, or working with a provider may help you take the next steps.

You can also find more resources about supports at: Get Help, Finding Therapy, SAMHSA Treatment Locator, or contact a local MHA affliliate.
Depression In Older Adults: More Facts
Depression In Older Adults: More Facts
Depression affects more than 19 million Americans every year, regardless of age, race, or gender. While depression is not a normal part of the aging process, there is a strong likelihood of it occurring when other physical health conditions are present. For example, nearly a quarter of the 600,000 people who experience a stroke in a given year will experience clinical depression.[1] Unfortunately, symptoms of depression are often overlooked and untreated when they coincide with other medical illnesses or life events that commonly occur as people age (e.g., loss of loved ones). However, clinical depression is never a “normal” response; it is a serious medical illness that should be treated at any age.

 

Prevalence

More than two million of the 34 million Americans age 65 and older suffer from some form of depression.[2]
Co-occurring Illnesses

Symptoms of clinical depression can be triggered by other chronic illnesses common in later life, such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, heart disease, cancer and arthritis.[3]
Widowhood

One-third of widows/widowers meet criteria for depression in the first month after the death of their spouse, and half of these individuals remain clinically depressed after one year.[4]
Healthcare Costs

Older patients with symptoms of depression have roughly 50% higher healthcare costs than non-depressed seniors.[5]
Suicide

Depression is a significant predictor of suicide in elderly Americans. [2]
Comprising only 13% of the U.S. population, individuals aged 65 and older account for 20% of all suicide deaths, with white males being particularly vulnerable. [2]
Suicide among white males aged 85 and older (65.3 deaths per 100,000 persons) is nearly six times the suicide rate (10.8 per 100,000) in the U.S. [2]
Treatment

More than 55% of older persons treated for mental health services received care from primary care physicians. Less than 3% aged 65 and older received treatment from mental health professionals.[6]
Primary care physicians accurately recognize less than one half of patients with depression, resulting in potentially decreased function and increased length of hospitalization. [7]
Fortunately, clinical depression is a very treatable illness. More than 80% of all people with depression can be successfully treated with medication, psychotherapy or a combination of both.[8]

Older Adult Attitudes Toward Depression:
According to a Mental Health America survey [9] on attitudes and beliefs about clinical depression:

Approximately 68% of adults aged 65 and over know little or almost nothing about depression.
Only 38% of adults aged 65 and over believe that depression is a “health” problem.
If suffering from depression, older adults are more likely than any other group to “handle it themselves.” Only 42% would seek help from a health professional.
Signs of depression are mentioned more frequently by people under age 64 than people aged 65 and over. These include “a change in eating habits” (29% vs. 15%), “a change in sleeping habits” (33% vs. 16%) and “sadness” (28% vs. 15%).
About 58% of people aged 65 and older believe that it is “normal” for people to get depressed as they grow older.
What Is Therapy?
Many children and teens have problems that affect how they feel, act, or learn. Therapy is a type of treatment for these problems. It is a way to get help for your child.

In therapy, kids talk and learn how to work out their problems. Going to therapy helps them cope better, communicate better, and do better.

What Problems Do Therapists Help With?
Therapists are trained to help with all kinds of problems. For example, they help kids and teens going through tough times like:

family problems
school problems
bullying
health problems
They help with feelings like:

sadness
anger
stress and worry
low self-esteem
grief
They help kids and teens with conditions like:

ADHD
depression
OCD and anxiety
eating disorders
self-injury
disruptive behavior disorders
trauma-related disorders
Why Do Kids and Teens Need Therapy?
Kids and teens need therapy when they have problems they can't cope with alone. Or they need help when problems affect how well they do, feel, or act. If things don't get better on their own, kids may need therapy so things can improve. Sometimes, entire families need support while trying to communicate, learn, and create boundaries.

How Does Therapy Work?
In therapy, kids learn by doing. With younger kids, this means working with the whole family, drawing, playing, and talking. For older kids and teens, therapists share activities and ideas that focus on learning the skills they need. They talk through feelings and solve problems.

Therapists give praise and support as kids learn. They help kids believe in themselves and find their strengths. Therapy builds helpful thinking patterns and healthy behavioral habits.

A therapist might meet with the child and parent together or meet with the child alone. It depends on the child's age. A therapist might also meet with a parent to give tips and ideas for how to help their child at home.

What Happens in Therapy?
At first, the therapist will meet with you and your child to talk. They will ask questions and listen. This helps them learn more about your child and about the problem. The therapist will tell you how they can help.

After that, your child will go to more therapy visits. At these visits, your child might:

Talk. Talking is a healthy way to express feelings. When kids put feelings into words instead of actions, they can act their best. When someone listens and knows how they feel, kids are more ready to learn.
Do activities. Therapists use activities to teach about feelings and coping skills. They may have kids draw or play as a way to learn. They may teach mindfulness and calm breathing as a way to lower stress.
Practice new skills. Therapists help kids practice what they learn. They might play games where kids need to wait their turn, use self-control, be patient, follow directions, listen, share, try again, or deal with losing.
Solve problems. With older kids and teens, therapists ask how problems affect them at home, at school. They talk over how to solve these problems.
How Long Do Kids Do Therapy?
How long therapy lasts depends on the goals you and your child's therapist have. Most of the time, a therapist will want to meet with your child once a week for a few months.

How Can Parents Help?
You can do things to help your child get the most from therapy. Here are some of them:

Find a therapist you and your child feel comfortable with. Your child's health care team can help you find someone.
Take your child to all the appointments. Change takes time. It takes many therapy visits for your child to learn new skills and keep them up.
Meet with your child's therapist. Ask what to do when your child shows problems at home. Ask how to help your child do well.
Spend time with your child. Play, cook, read, or laugh together. Do this every day, even if it's only for a few minutes.
Parent with patience and warmth. Use kind words, even when you need to correct your child. Show love. Give praise when your child is doing well or trying hard.
What is depression in teens?
Depression in teens (ages 13-17) is a serious medical illness. It's more than just a feeling of being sad or "blue" for a few days. It is an intense feeling of sadness, hopelessness, and anger or frustration that lasts much longer. These feelings make it hard for you to function normally and do your usual activities. You may also have trouble focusing and have no motivation or energy. Depression can make you feel like it is hard to enjoy life or even get through the day.

What causes depression in teens?
Many factors may play a role in depression, including:

Genetics. Depression can run in families.
Brain biology and chemistry.
Hormones. Hormone changes can contribute to depression.
Stressful childhood events such as trauma, the death of a loved one, bullying, and abuse.
Which teens are at risk of depression?
Depression can happen at any age, but often begins in the teens or early adulthood. Certain teens are at higher risk of depression, such as those who:

Have other mental health conditions, such as anxiety, eating disorders, and substance use
Have other diseases, such as diabetes, cancer, and heart disease
Have family members with mental illness
Have a dysfunctional family/family conflict
Have problems with friends or other kids at school
Have learning disabilities or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Have had trauma in childhood
Have low self-esteem, a pessimistic outlook, or poor coping skills
Are members of the LGBTQIA+ community, especially when their families are not supportive
What are the symptoms of depression in teens?
If you have depression, you have one or more of these symptoms most of the time:

Sadness
Feeling of emptiness
Hopelessness
Being angry, irritable, or frustrated, even at minor things
You also may also have other symptoms, such as:

No longer caring about things you used to enjoy
Changes in weight, such as losing weight when you are not dieting or gaining weight from eating too much
Changes in sleep, such as having trouble falling asleep or staying asleep, or sleeping much more than usual
Feeling restless or having trouble sitting still
Feeling very tired or not having energy
Feeling worthless or very guilty
Having trouble concentrating, remembering information, or making decisions
Thinking about dying or suicide
How is depression in teens diagnosed?
If you think you might be depressed, tell someone that you trust, such as your:

Parents or guardian
Teacher or counselor
Doctor
The next step is to see your doctor for a checkup. Your doctor can first make sure that you do not have another health problem that is causing your depression. To do this, you may have a physical exam and lab tests.

If you don't have another health problem, you will get a psychological evaluation. Your doctor may do it, or you may be referred to a mental health professional to get one. You may be asked about things such as:

Your thoughts and feelings
How you are doing at school
Any changes in your eating, sleeping, or energy level
Whether you are suicidal
Whether you use alcohol or drugs
How is depression in teens treated?
Effective treatments for depression in teens include talk therapy, or a combination of talk therapy and medicines:

Talk therapy

Talk therapy, also called psychotherapy or counseling, can help you understand and manage your moods and feelings. It involves going to see a therapist, such as a psychiatrist, a psychologist, a social worker, or counselor. You can talk out your emotions to someone who understands and supports you. You can also learn how to stop thinking negatively and start to look at the positives in life. This will help you build confidence and feel better about yourself.

There are many different types of talk therapy. Certain types have been shown to help teens deal with depression, including:

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), which helps you to identify and change negative and unhelpful thoughts. It also helps you build coping skills and change behavioral patterns.
Interpersonal therapy (IPT), which focuses on improving your relationships. It helps you understand and work through troubled relationships that may contribute to your depression. IPT may help you change behaviors that are causing problems. You also explore major issues that may add to your depression, such as grief or life changes.
Medicines

In some cases, your doctor will suggest medicines along with talk therapy. There are a few antidepressants that have been widely studied and proven to help teens. If you are taking medicine for depression, it is important to see your doctor regularly.

It is also important to know that it will take some time for you to get relief from antidepressants:

It can take 3 to 4 weeks until an antidepressant takes effect
You may have to try more than one antidepressant to find one that works for you
It can also take some time to find the right dose of an antidepressant
In some cases, teenagers may have an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants. This risk is higher in the first few weeks after starting the medicine and when the dose is changed. Make sure to tell your parents or guardian if you start feeling worse or have thoughts of hurting yourself.

You should not stop taking the antidepressants on your own. You need to work with your doctor to slowly and safely decrease the dose before you stop.

Programs for severe depression

Some teens who have severe depression or are at risk of hurting themselves may need more intensive treatment. They may go into a psychiatric hospital or do a day program. Both offer counseling, group discussions, and activities with mental health professionals and other patients. Day programs may be full-day or half-day, and they often last for several weeks.

Male depression is a serious medical condition, but many men try to ignore it or refuse treatment. Learn the signs and symptoms — and what to do.

By Mayo Clinic Staff
Do you feel irritable, isolated or withdrawn? Do you find yourself working all the time? Drinking too much? These unhealthy coping strategies may be clues that you have male depression.

Depression can affect men and women differently. When depression occurs in men, it may be masked by unhealthy coping behavior. For a number of reasons, male depression often goes undiagnosed and can have devastating consequences when it goes untreated. But male depression usually gets better with treatment.

Depression signs and symptoms can differ in men and women. Men also tend to use different coping skills — both healthy and unhealthy — than women do. It isn't clear why men and women may experience depression differently. It likely involves a number of factors, including brain chemistry, hormones and life experiences.

Like women with depression, men with depression may:

Feel sad, hopeless or empty
Feel extremely tired
Have difficulty sleeping or sleep too much
Not get pleasure from activities usually enjoyed
Other behaviors in men that could be signs of depression — but not recognized as such — include:

Escapist behavior, such as spending a lot of time at work or on sports
Physical symptoms, such as headaches, digestive problems and pain
Problems with alcohol or drug use
Controlling, violent or abusive behavior
Irritability or inappropriate anger
Risky behavior, such as reckless driving
Because these behaviors could be signs of or might overlap with other mental health issues, or may be associated with medical conditions, professional help is the key to an accurate diagnosis and appropriate treatment.

Men with depression often aren't diagnosed for several reasons, including:

Failure to recognize depression. You may think that feeling sad or emotional is always the main symptom of depression. But for many men, that isn't the primary symptom. For example, headaches, digestive problems, tiredness, irritability or long-term pain can sometimes indicate depression. So can feeling isolated and seeking distraction to avoid dealing with feelings or relationships.
Downplaying signs and symptoms. You may not recognize how much your symptoms affect you, or you may not want to admit to yourself or to anyone else that you're depressed. But ignoring, suppressing or masking depression with unhealthy behavior will only worsen the negative emotions.
Reluctance to discuss depression symptoms. You may not be open to talking about your feelings with family or friends, let alone with a doctor or mental health professional. Like many men, you may have learned to emphasize self-control. You may think it's not manly to express feelings and emotions associated with depression, and you try to suppress them.
Resisting mental health treatment. Even if you suspect you have depression, you may avoid diagnosis or refuse treatment. You may avoid getting help because you're worried that the stigma of depression could damage your career or cause family and friends to lose respect for you.
Although women attempt suicide more often than men do, men are more likely to complete suicide. That's because men:

Use methods that are more likely to cause death, such as guns
May act more impulsively on suicidal thoughts
Show fewer warning signs, such as talking about suicide
If you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, get help right now:

Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
Contact a suicide hotline. In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Or use the Lifeline Chat. Services are free and confidential.
If you're feeling suicidal, but you aren't immediately thinking of hurting yourself, seek help:

Reach out to a close friend or loved one — even though it may be hard to talk about your feelings.
Contact a minister, spiritual leader or someone in your faith community.
Consider joining a men's health group that deals with depression.
Call a suicide crisis center hotline.
Make an appointment with your doctor, other primary care provider or mental health professional.
Asking for help can be hard for men. But without treatment, depression is unlikely to go away, and it may get worse. Untreated depression can make you and the people close to you miserable. It can cause problems in every aspect of your life, including your health, career, relationships and personal safety.

Depression, even if it's severe, usually improves with medications or psychological counseling (psychotherapy) or both. If you or someone close to you thinks you may be depressed, talk to your doctor or a mental health professional. It's a sign of strength to ask for advice or seek help when you need it.

Treatment, including psychotherapy, with a mental health professional can help you learn healthy coping skills. These may include:

Goals. Set realistic goals and prioritize tasks.
Support. Seek out emotional support from a partner or family or friends. Learn strategies for making social connections so that you can get involved in social activities.
Coping. Learn ways to manage stress, such as meditation and mindfulness, and develop problem-solving skills.
Decisions. Delay making important decisions, such as changing jobs, until your depression symptoms improve.
Activities. Engage in activities you typically enjoy, such as ball games, fishing or a hobby.
Health. Try to stick to a regular schedule and make healthy lifestyle choices, including healthy eating and regular physical activity, to help promote better mental health.
Many effective treatments are available for depression. So don't try to tough out male depression on your own — the consequences could be devastating.

Depression
March 1, 2022

This sheet is about having depression in a pregnancy or while breastfeeding. This information should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.

What is depression?

Depression is a serious medical illness that can have different causes. It can change how someone feels, thinks, and acts. The most common symptoms of depression are long-lasting and strong feelings of sadness and not being able to feel pleasure or happiness. Other symptoms include anxiety, irritability, trouble concentrating, fatigue (feeling very tired), and thoughts of death or self-harm. Physical symptoms of depression can include increased heart rate, loss of appetite, stomach pain, and headaches.

Pregnancy may trigger the development of depression in some people. This may be due to changes in hormone levels during pregnancy and the stress that comes with this major life event. Treatment for depression can include counseling, psychotherapy, and / or medications.

I think I have depression and I am pregnant. What should I do?

Contact your healthcare provider as soon as possible. They can work with you to create a plan for the health of you and your baby. Share your feelings with your partner, family, friends, or other people you trust so you can receive support. If you feel you may hurt yourself, your pregnancy, or someone else, seek emergency medical care at once. More information about crisis services can be found here: https://mothertobaby.org/pregnancy-breastfeeding-exposures/mental-health/

I have depression and I am planning on getting pregnant. Is there anything I need to know?

Talk to your healthcare providers about your plans to get pregnant so they can review your current health and treatments. Sometimes, changes in treatment may be recommended before or during pregnancy.

Can having depression make it harder for me to get pregnant?

Some studies suggest having depression may make it harder to get pregnant.

Does having depression increase the chance for miscarriage?

Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Some studies have reported a higher chance for miscarriage when depression is left untreated in pregnancy.

Does having depression increase the chance of birth defects?

Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. Depression itself is not expected to increase the chance for birth defects above the background risk. However, depression during pregnancy should be treated. Many antidepressant medications have been studied in pregnancy and have not been linked to a higher chance for birth defects. For questions about specific medications and pregnancy, talk with your healthcare provider or a MotherToBaby specialist

Does having depression increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems?

Some studies have reported a higher chance for preterm delivery (birth before week 37), low birth weight, babies who are smaller than expected, and preeclampsia (dangerously high blood pressure in pregnancy) when depression is left untreated in pregnancy. Preeclampsia is a pregnancy-related disorder, which can lead to preterm delivery and complications for the person who is pregnant and their baby. If the person who is pregnant has depression, they may also have changes in their sleeping or eating patterns.

Does having depression in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?   

Some studies have shown untreated depression in pregnancy may negatively affect a child’s behavior or development.

I do not want to take my medication for depression during my pregnancy. My healthcare provider said this could be worse for my baby and me. Is this true?

Studies have found that people who are pregnant with depression and their babies typically have better outcomes if they receive treatment compared to having untreated depression.

Stopping your medication could lead to a return of your symptoms of depression (relapse). One study found that those who stopped their medications for major depression had a 5 times greater risk of relapse during pregnancy compared to those who stayed on their medications. Restarting the antidepressant medication lowered the chance of a relapse, but it did not completely prevent the relapse in all cases. A relapse of depression during pregnancy could increase the risk of pregnancy complications.

It is important to talk with your healthcare providers before making any changes to how you take your medication. Your healthcare providers can talk with you about the benefits of treating your condition and the risks of untreated illness during pregnancy. Consider your personal feelings, the severity of your symptoms, any past hospitalizations, how quickly symptoms have returned in the past if you have ever gone off medication, and how quickly you respond when you restart medications.

If you decide to stop your antidepressant medication, your healthcare provider may suggest that you slowly lower your dose before you stop completely. This is to help prevent possible withdrawal symptoms that some people experience when they suddenly stop taking antidepressants. It is not known what effects, if any, withdrawal could have on a pregnancy.

What about alternative treatments for depression during my pregnancy?

Most herbal remedies, supplements, or other nontraditional therapies have not been studied enough to know if or how they may affect a pregnancy. It is important to discuss any alternative therapies that you are considering with your obstetric and mental healthcare providers before you use them. Please see our fact sheet on Herbal Supplements here: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/herbal-products-pregnancy/. You may also contact MotherToBaby to speak with a specialist about specific treatments and available research on use in a pregnancy.

I feel so sad and have so little energy that I am having trouble going to my prenatal care appointments. Can this affect my baby?

Regular prenatal appointments can help to improve outcomes for you and your baby. It is not uncommon for people with depression to not feel motivated or have the energy to participate in parts of their day-to-day life, including going to your appointments. Studies have found that people with mental health conditions, including depression, go to less than half of their prenatal care appointments. Studies have also shown higher rates of preterm births and deaths in the newborn period in the babies of those who did not have appropriate prenatal care.

Do people with depression during pregnancy have a higher chance of having postpartum depression or mood disorders?

One of the most serious effects of not treating depression during pregnancy is the increased chance for postpartum depression (PPD). PPD is depression following childbirth. While the general population risk for PPD is approximately 5-15%, a number of studies have shown higher rates of PPD among individuals who were depressed during their pregnancy. Reports have suggested that PPD may make it harder for a person to take care of and bond with the baby. This might have a negative effect on the baby’s development and behavior.

Breastfeeding while I have depression:

Breastfeeding has benefits for the health of both the person who is breastfeeding and the baby. Studies have found that people with depression during pregnancy tend to breastfeed their babies for a shorter time. Breastfeeding may lower the chance of postpartum depression or reduce symptoms of depression.

Some people may struggle with depression while breastfeeding. Find people who are supportive such as family, friends, your healthcare provider, or a lactation consultant. Ask for help if you have any concerns or trouble with nursing. You can contact a MotherToBaby specialist to discuss your treatment while breastfeeding. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all of your breastfeeding questions.

If a male has depression, could it affect fertility (ability to get partner pregnant) or increase the chance of birth defects?

Some reports have found depression in males can decrease the chance of conceiving a pregnancy. Depression and anxiety in male patients have been shown to lower semen volume and sperm density. Some studies have found that 2% to 9% of males can experience depression during a partner’s pregnancy. Emotional well-being is important, not only for a person’s health, but also for the health and support of their partner and children. Anyone who has symptoms of depression should seek appropriate care. In general, exposures that fathers or sperm donors have are unlikely to increase the risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
About twice as many women as men experience depression. Several factors may increase a woman's risk of depression.

By Mayo Clinic Staff
Women are nearly twice as likely as men to be diagnosed with depression. Depression can occur at any age.

Some mood changes and depressed feelings occur with normal hormonal changes. But hormonal changes alone don't cause depression. Other biological factors, inherited traits, and personal life circumstances and experiences are associated with a higher risk of depression. Here's what contributes to depression in women.

Hormone changes during puberty may increase some girls' risk of developing depression. However, temporary mood swings related to fluctuating hormones during puberty are normal — these changes alone don't cause depression.

Puberty is often associated with other experiences that can play a role in depression, such as:

Emerging sexuality and identity issues
Conflicts with parents
Increasing pressure to achieve in school, sports or other areas of life
After puberty, depression rates are higher in females than in males. Because girls typically reach puberty before boys do, they're more likely to develop depression at an earlier age than boys are. There is evidence to suggest that this depression gender gap may continue throughout the lifespan.

For most females with premenstrual syndrome (PMS), symptoms such as abdominal bloating, breast tenderness, headache, anxiety, irritability and experiencing the blues are minor and short-lived.

But a small number of females have severe and disabling symptoms that disrupt their studies, jobs, relationships or other areas of their lives. At that point, PMS may cross the line into premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) — a type of depression that generally requires treatment.

The exact interaction between depression and PMS remains unclear. It's possible that cyclical changes in estrogen, progesterone and other hormones can disrupt the function of brain chemicals such as serotonin that control mood. Inherited traits, life experiences and other factors appear to play a role.

Dramatic hormonal changes occur during pregnancy, and these can affect mood. Other issues also may increase the risk of developing depression during pregnancy or during attempts to become pregnant, such as:

Lifestyle or work changes or other life stressors
Relationship problems
Previous episodes of depression, postpartum depression or PMDD
Lack of social support
Unintended or unwanted pregnancy
Miscarriage
Infertility
Stopping use of antidepressant medications
Many new mothers find themselves sad, angry and irritable, and experience crying spells soon after giving birth. These feelings — sometimes called the baby blues — are normal and generally subside within a week or two. But more-serious or long-lasting depressed feelings may indicate postpartum depression, particularly if signs and symptoms include:

Crying more often than usual
Low self-esteem or feeling like you're a bad mom
Anxiety or feeling numb
Trouble sleeping, even when your baby is sleeping
Problems with daily functioning
Inability to care for your baby
Thoughts of harming your baby
Thoughts of suicide
Postpartum depression is a serious medical condition requiring prompt treatment. It occurs in about 10 to 15 percent of women. It's thought to be associated with:

Major hormonal fluctuations that influence mood
The responsibility of caring for a newborn
Predisposition to mood and anxiety disorders
Pregnancy and birth complications
Breast-feeding problems
Infant complications or special needs
Poor social support
Risk of depression may increase during the transition to menopause, a stage called perimenopause, when hormone levels may fluctuate erratically. Depression risk may also rise during early menopause or after menopause — both times when estrogen levels are significantly reduced.

Most women who experience bothersome menopausal symptoms don't develop depression. But these factors may increase the risk:

Interrupted or poor sleep
Anxiety or a history of depression
Stressful life events
Weight gain or a higher body mass index (BMI)
Menopause at a younger age
Menopause caused by surgical removal of the ovaries
The higher rate of depression in women isn't due to biology alone. Life circumstances and cultural stressors can play a role, too. Although these stressors also occur in men, it's usually at a lower rate. Factors that may increase the risk of depression in women include:

Unequal power and status. Women are much more likely than men to live in poverty, causing concerns such as uncertainty about the future and decreased access to community and health care resources. These issues can cause feelings of negativity, low self-esteem and lack of control over life.
Work overload. Often women work outside the home and still handle home responsibilities. Many women deal with the challenges of single parenthood, such as working multiple jobs to make ends meet. Also, women may be caring for their children while also caring for sick or older family members.
Sexual or physical abuse. Women who were emotionally, physically or sexually abused as children or adults are more likely to experience depression at some point in their lives than those who weren't abused. Women are more likely than men to experience sexual abuse.
Women with depression often have other mental health conditions that need treatment as well, such as:

Anxiety. Anxiety commonly occurs along with depression in women.
Eating disorders. There's a strong link between depression in women and eating disorders such as anorexia and bulimia.
Drug or alcohol misuse. Some women with depression also have some form of unhealthy substance use or dependence. Substance misuse can worsen depression and make it harder to treat.
Although depression might seem overwhelming, there's effective treatment. Even severe depression often can be successfully treated. Seek help if you have any signs and symptoms of depression, such as:

Ongoing feelings of sadness, guilt or hopelessness
Loss of interest in things you once enjoyed
Significant changes in your sleep pattern, such as trouble falling or staying asleep or sleeping too much
Fatigue or unexplained pain or other physical symptoms without an apparent cause
Problems concentrating or remembering things
Changes in appetite leading to significant weight loss or weight gain
Physical aches and pains
Feeling as though life isn't worth living, or having thoughts of suicide
Not sure how to get treatment? Consider turning to your primary care provider first — for example, your family doctor, internist, nurse practitioner, obstetrician or gynecologist. If needed, your primary care provider can refer you to a mental health professional who specializes in diagnosing and treating depression.

Remember, depression is both common and treatable. If you think you're depressed, don't hesitate to seek help.
Depression in Women: 5 Things You Should Know
Depression in Women cover image
Download PDF
Order a free hardcopy
En español
Being sad is a normal reaction to difficult times in life. But usually, the sadness goes away with a little time. Depression is different—it is a mood disorder that may cause severe symptoms that can affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities such as sleeping, eating, or working. Depression is more common among women than men, likely due to certain biological, hormonal, and social factors that are unique to women.

This brochure contains an overview of five things that everyone should know about depression in women.

1. Depression is a real medical condition.
Depression is a common but serious mood disorder. Depression symptoms can interfere with your ability to work, sleep, study, eat, and enjoy your life. Although researchers are still studying the causes of depression, current research suggests that depression is caused by a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors. Most people with depression need treatment to feel better.

You can’t just ‘snap out’ of depression.
Well-meaning friends or family members may try to tell someone with depression to “snap out of it,” “just be positive,” or “you can be happier if you just try harder.” But depression is not a sign of a person’s weakness or a character flaw. The truth is that most people who experience depression need treatment to get better.

If you are a friend or family member of a woman with depression, you can offer emotional support, understanding, patience, and encouragement. But never dismiss her feelings. Encourage her to talk to her health care provider, and remind her that, with time and treatment, she can feel better.

Most people with depression need treatment to feel better.
If you think you may have depression, start by making an appointment to see your health care provider. This could be your primary doctor or a health provider who specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health conditions (for example, a psychologist or psychiatrist). Certain medications, and some medical conditions, such as viruses or a thyroid disorder, can cause the same symptoms as depression. A health care provider can rule out these possibilities by doing a physical exam, interview, and lab tests. Your health care provider will examine you and talk to you about treatment options and next steps.

Talking to Your Health Care Provider About Your Mental Health
Communicating well with your health care provider can improve your care and help you both make good choices about your health. Read about tips to help prepare and get the most out of your visit. For additional resources, including questions to ask your health care provider, visit the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality .

2. Depression can hurt—literally.
Sadness is only a small part of depression. Some people with depression do not feel sadness at all. A person with depression also may experience many physical symptoms, such as aches or pains, headaches, cramps, or digestive problems. Someone with depression also may have trouble with sleeping, waking up in the morning, and feeling tired.

If you have been experiencing any of the following signs and symptoms for at least two weeks, you may be suffering from depression:

Persistent sad, anxious, or “empty” mood
Feelings of hopelessness or pessimism
Irritability
Feelings of guilt, worthlessness, or helplessness
Decreased energy or fatigue
Difficulty sleeping, early morning awakening, or oversleeping
Loss of interest or pleasure in hobbies and activities
Moving or talking more slowly
Feeling restless or having trouble sitting still
Difficulty concentrating, remembering, or making decisions
Changes in appetite or weight
Thoughts of death or suicide, or suicide attempts
Aches or pains, headaches, cramps, or digestive problems without a clear physical cause that do not ease even with treatment
Talk to your health care provider about these symptoms. Be honest, clear, and concise—your provider needs to know how you feel. Your health care provider may ask when your symptoms started, what time of day they happen, how long they last, how often they occur, if they seem to be getting worse or better, and if they keep you from going out or doing your usual activities. It may help to take the time to make some notes about your symptoms before you visit your provider.

3. Certain types of depression are unique to women.
Pregnancy, the postpartum period, perimenopause, and the menstrual cycle are all associated with dramatic physical and hormonal changes. Certain types of depression can occur at different stages of a woman’s life.

Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder (PMDD)
Premenstrual syndrome, or PMS, refers to moodiness and irritability in the weeks before menstruation. It is quite common, and the symptoms are usually mild. But there is a less common, more severe form of PMS called premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). PMDD is a serious condition with disabling symptoms such as irritability, anger, depressed mood, sadness, suicidal thoughts, appetite changes, bloating, breast tenderness, and joint or muscle pain.

Perinatal Depression
Being pregnant isn’t easy. Pregnant women commonly deal with morning sickness, weight gain, and mood swings. Caring for a newborn is challenging, too. Many new moms experience the “baby blues”—a term used to describe mild mood changes and feelings of worry, unhappiness, and exhaustion that many women sometimes experience in the first two weeks after having a baby. These feelings usually last a week or two and then go away as a new mom adjusts to having a newborn.

Perinatal depression is a mood disorder that can affect women during pregnancy and after childbirth, and is much more serious than the “baby blues.” The word “perinatal” refers to the time before and after the birth of a child. Perinatal depression includes depression that begins during pregnancy (called prenatal depression) and depression that begins after the baby is born (called postpartum depression). Mothers with perinatal depression experience feelings of extreme sadness, anxiety, and fatigue that may make it difficult for them to carry out daily tasks, including caring for themselves, their new child, or others.

If you think you have perinatal depression, you should talk to your health care provider or trained mental health care professional. If you see any signs of depression in a loved one during her pregnancy or after the child is born, encourage her to see a health care provider or visit a clinic.

To learn more about perinatal depression, see the National Institute of Mental Health’s (NIMH) Perinatal Depression brochure.

Perimenopausal Depression
Perimenopause (the transition into menopause) is a normal phase in a woman’s life that can sometimes be challenging. If you are going through perimenopause, you might be experiencing abnormal periods, problems sleeping, mood swings, and hot flashes. Although these symptoms are common, feeling depressed is not. If you are struggling with irritability, anxiety, sadness, or loss of enjoyment at the time of the menopause transition, you may be experiencing perimenopausal depression.

Depression affects each woman differently.
Not every woman who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some women experience only a few symptoms. Others have many. The severity and frequency of symptoms, and how long they last, will vary depending on the individual and the severity of the illness.

Where Can I Learn More About Depression in Women?
The following agencies have additional information on depression in women.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office on Women’s Health: Depression 

U.S. Food and Drug Administration: Women and Depression 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Depression Among Women 

4. Depression can be treated.
Even the most severe cases of depression can be treated. Depression is commonly treated with medication, psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy”), or a combination of the two.

Antidepressants are medications commonly used to treat depression. People respond differently to antidepressants, and you may need to try different medicines to find the one that works best. Researchers also are studying and developing other medications for depression, such as brexanolone for postpartum depression, and esketamine. You can learn about recent developments on these and other medications at NIMH's Science News webpage under the topic “Treatments.”

There are many different types of psychotherapy, such as cognitive behavioral therapy or interpersonal therapy. The particular approach a therapist uses depends on the condition being treated and the training and experience of the therapist. Therapists also may combine and adapt elements of different approaches.

Depression affects each individual differently. There is no “one-size-fits-all” for treatment. It may take some trial and error to find the treatment that works best. You can learn more about the different types of depression treatment, including psychotherapy, medication, and brain stimulation therapies, on the NIMH’s webpage about depression. Visit the Food and Drug Administration website  for the latest information on medication approvals, warnings, and patient information guides.

What to Consider When Looking for a Therapist
Therapists and patients work together, and finding a good match is important. The following tips can help you find the right therapist.

Ask about their areas of expertise. Therapists have different professional backgrounds and specialties. You want to find a therapist who has experience working with your specific condition.

Find out what kinds of treatments they use. Ask if those treatments are effective for dealing with your particular mental health problem or issue.

Find out how you’ll evaluate progress. Determine how long treatment is expected to last, and when you should expect to gain relief from symptoms and improve your quality of life.

Don’t be afraid to keep looking. Rapport and trust are essential. Discussions in therapy are deeply personal, and it’s important that you feel comfortable with the therapist you pick.

5. Researchers at the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) and across the country are dedicated to women’s mental health research.
Researchers continue to study depression to improve the way this medical condition is diagnosed and treated. For example, NIMH researchers are currently working to understand how and why changes in reproductive hormones trigger mood disorders, including postpartum depression, premenstrual dysphoric disorder, and perimenopausal depression.

NIMH scientists are conducting a large number of research studies with patients and healthy volunteers to better understand why some women are at higher risk than others, and how they can translate these findings into new treatments or new uses of existing treatments.
Depression
Life is full of ups and downs, but when you feel sad, empty, or hopeless most of the time for at least 2 weeks or those feelings keep you from your regular activities, you may have depression. Depression is a serious mental health condition. In the past year, women were almost twice as likely as men to have symptoms of depression.1 Depression is not a normal part of being a woman. Most women, even those with the most severe depression, can get better with treatment.

Collapse All
What is depression?
Depression is a mental health illness when someone feels sad (including crying often), empty, or hopeless most of the time (or loses interest in or takes no pleasure in daily activities) for at least 2 weeks. Depression affects a person’s ability to work, go to school, or have relationships with friends and family. Depression is one of the most common mental health conditions in the United States.2 It is an illness that involves the body, mood, and thoughts. It can affect the way you eat and sleep, the way you feel about yourself, and the way you think about things.

It is different from feeling “blue” or “down” or just sad for a few hours or a couple of days. Depression is also different from grief over losing a loved one or experiencing sadness after a trauma or difficult event. It is not a condition that can be willed or wished away. People who have depression cannot just “pull themselves” out of it.

Are there different types of depression?
Yes. Different kinds of depression include:

Major depressive disorder. Also called major depression, this is a combination of symptoms that affects a person’s ability to sleep, work, study, eat, and enjoy hobbies and everyday activities.
Dysthymic disorder. Also called dysthymia, this kind of depression lasts for 2 years or more. The symptoms are less severe than those of major depression but can prevent you from living normally or feeling well.
Other types of depression have slightly different symptoms and may start after a certain event. These types of depression include:

Psychotic depression, when a severe depressive illness happens with some form of psychosis, such as a break with reality, hallucinations, and delusions
Postpartum depression, which is diagnosed if a new mother has a major depressive episode after delivery. Depression can also begin during pregnancy, called prenatal depression.
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD), which is a depression during the winter months, when there is less natural sunlight
Bipolar depression, which is the depressive phase of bipolar illness and requires different treatment than major depression
Who gets depression?
Women are twice as likely as men to be diagnosed with depression.1 It is more than twice as common for African-American, Hispanic, and white women to have depression compared to Asian-American women. Depression is also more common in women whose families live below the federal poverty line.3

What causes depression?
There is no single cause of depression. Also, different types of depression may have different causes. There are many reasons why a woman may have depression:

Family history. Women with a family history of depression may be more at risk. But depression can also happen in women who don’t have a family history of depression.
Brain changes. The brains of people with depression look and function differently from those of people who don’t have depression.
Chemistry. In someone who has depression, parts of the brain that manage mood, thoughts, sleep, appetite, and behavior may not have the right balance of chemicals.
Hormone levels. Changes in the female hormones estrogen and progesterone during the menstrual cycle, pregnancy, postpartum period, perimenopause, or menopause may all raise a woman’s risk for depression. Having a miscarriage can also put a woman at higher risk for depression.
Stress. Serious and stressful life events, or the combination of several stressful events, such as trauma, loss of a loved one, a bad relationship, work responsibilities, caring for children and aging parents, abuse, and poverty, may trigger depression in some people.
Medical problems. Dealing with a serious health problem, such as stroke, heart attack, or cancer, can lead to depression. Research shows that people who have a serious illness and depression are more likely to have more serious types of both conditions.4 Some medical illnesses, like Parkinson’s disease, hypothyroidism, and stroke, can cause changes in the brain that can trigger depression.
Pain. Women who feel emotional or physical pain for long periods are much more likely to develop depression.5 The pain can come from a chronic (long-term) health problem, accident, or trauma such as sexual assault or abuse.
What are the symptoms of depression?
Not all people with depression have the same symptoms. Some people might have only a few symptoms, while others may have many. How often symptoms happen, how long they last, and how severe they are may be different for each person.

If you have any of the following symptoms for at least 2 weeks, talk to a doctor or nurse or mental health professional:

Feeling sad, “down,” or empty, including crying often
Feeling hopeless, helpless, worthless, or useless
Loss of interest in hobbies and activities that you once enjoyed
Decreased energy
Difficulty staying focused, remembering, or making decisions
Sleeplessness, early morning awakening, or oversleeping and not wanting to get up
Lack of appetite, leading to weight loss, or eating to feel better, leading to weight gain
Thoughts of hurting yourself
Thoughts of death or suicide
Feeling easily annoyed, bothered, or angered
Constant physical symptoms that do not get better with treatment, such as headaches, upset stomach, and pain that doesn’t go away
How is depression linked to other health problems?
Depression is linked to many health problems in women, including:6

Heart disease. People with heart disease are about twice as likely to have depression as people who don’t have heart disease.7
Obesity. Studies show that 43% of adults with depression have obesity. Women, especially white women, with depression are more likely to have obesity than women without depression are.8 Women with depression are also more likely than men with depression to have obesity.8
Cancer. Up to 1 in 4 people with cancer may also experience depression. More women with cancer than men with cancer experience depression.9
How is depression diagnosed?
Talk to your doctor or nurse if you have symptoms of depression. Certain medicines and some health problems (such as viruses or a thyroid disorder) can cause the same symptoms as depression. Sometimes depression can be part of another mental health condition.

Diagnosis of depression includes a mental health professional asking questions about your life, emotions, struggles, and symptoms. The doctor, nurse, or mental health professional may order lab tests on a sample of your blood or urine and do a regular checkup to rule out other problems that could be causing your symptoms.

How is depression treated?
Your doctor or mental health professional may treat depression with therapy, medicine, or a combination of the two. Your doctor or nurse may refer you to a mental health specialist for therapy.

Some people with milder forms of depression get better after a few months of therapy. People with moderate to severe depression might need therapy and a type of medicine called an antidepressant. Antidepressants change the levels of certain chemicals in your brain. It may take several weeks for antidepressants to work. There are different types of antidepressant medicines, and some work better than others for certain people. Some people get better only with both treatments — therapy and antidepressants. Learn what you can do if these treatments don't help.

Having depression can make some people more likely to turn to drugs or alcohol to cope. But drugs or alcohol can make your mental health condition worse and can affect how antidepressants work. Talk to your therapist or doctor or nurse about any alcohol or drug use.

What if the treatments I try for depression don’t work?
Give treatments time to work. It may take several weeks for the antidepressants to start working. Do not suddenly stop taking medicine for depression without talking to your doctor or nurse first.

If you have major depressive disorder and have tried at least 2 types of antidepressants but your symptoms are not getting better, you may have treatment-resistant depression. If you have this type of depression, you may be able to try a treatment called esketamine. Esketamine is a nasal spray that has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment-resistant depression when taken together with an antidepressant.10 Do not take esketamine if you are pregnant or breastfeeding. Talk to your doctor or nurse about the benefits and risks of esketamine. Learn more about esketamine from the FDA.

If you have severe depression, you can also ask your doctor or nurse if electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and other brain stimulation therapies are treatment options.11 Learn more about ECT from the National Institutes of Mental Health.

I think I may have depression. How can I get help?
Talk to someone like a doctor, nurse, psychiatrist, mental health professional, or social worker about your symptoms. You can also find no-cost or low-cost help in your state by using the mental health services locator on the top left side (desktop view) or bottom (mobile view) of this page.

What if I have thoughts of hurting myself?
If you are thinking about hurting or even killing yourself, get help now. Call 911 or the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline  at 1-800-273-TALK (8255).

You might feel like your pain is too overwhelming to bear, but those feelings don’t last forever. People do make it through suicidal thoughts. Many thoughts of suicide are impulses that go away after a short period of time.12

Can I take St. John’s wort to treat depression?
Taking St. John’s wort for depression has not been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Studies show mixed results about the plant’s ability to treat depression.13

It may be dangerous to take St. John’s wort if you also take other medicines. St. John’s wort can make many medicines not work at all or may cause dangerous or life-threatening side effects. The medicines used to treat heart disease, HIV, depression, seizures, certain cancers, and organ transplant rejection may not work or may have dangerous side effects if taken with St. John’s wort. St. John’s wort may also make birth control pills not work, which increases the chance you will get pregnant when you don’t want to.14 It is crucial that you tell your doctor or nurse if you take St. John’s wort.

Depression is a serious mental illness that can be successfully treated with therapy and FDA-approved medicines. FDA-approved medicines and natural treatments can have side effects. It’s best to talk to a doctor or nurse about treatment for depression.

Does exercise help treat depression?
For some people, yes. Researchers think that exercise may work better than no treatment at all to treat depression.15 They also think that regular exercise can lower your risk of getting depression and help many depression symptoms get better.16 Researchers do not know whether exercise works as well as therapy or medicine to treat depression.15 People with depression often find it very difficult to exercise, even though they know it will help make them feel better. Walking is a good way to begin exercising if you haven’t exercised recently.

Are there other natural or complementary treatments for depression?
Researchers are studying natural and complementary treatments (add-on treatments to medicine or therapy) for depression. Currently, none of the natural or complementary treatments are proven to work as well as medicine and therapy for depression. However, natural or complementary treatments that have little or no risk, like exercise, meditation, or relaxation training, may help improve your depression symptoms and usually will not make them worse.

Will treatment for depression affect my chances of getting pregnant?
Maybe. Some medicines, such as some types of antidepressants, may make it more difficult for you to get pregnant, but more research is needed.17 Talk to your doctor about other treatments for depression that don’t involve medicine if you are trying to get pregnant. For example, a type of talk therapy called cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) helps women with depression.18 This type of therapy has little to no risk for women trying to get pregnant. During CBT, you work with a mental health professional to explore why you are depressed and train yourself to replace negative thoughts with positive ones. Certain mental health care professionals specialize in depression related to infertility.

Women who are already taking an antidepressant and who are trying to get pregnant should talk to their doctor or nurse about the risks and benefits of stopping the medicine. Learn more about taking medicines during pregnancy in our Pregnancy section.
Depression and Older Adults
Español

Feeling down every once in a while is a normal part of life, but if these feelings last a few weeks or months, you may have depression. Read this article to find common signs and symptoms of depression, treatment options, and if you or your loved one may be at risk for depression.

On this page:

What is depression?
What are risk factors of depression?
What are signs and symptoms of depression?
Supporting friends and family with depression
Talking with friends and family about suicide
How is depression treated?
Depression in people with dementia
Can depression be prevented?
What is depression?
Depression is a serious mood disorder. It can affect the way you feel, act, and think. Depression is a common problem among older adults, but clinical depression is not a normal part of aging. In fact, studies show that most older adults feel satisfied with their lives, despite having more illnesses or physical problems than younger people. However, if you’ve experienced depression as a younger person, you may be more likely to have depression as an older adult.

4 Things To Know About Depression and Older Adults infographic
Read and share this infographic about depression and older adults.
Depression is serious, and treatments are available to help. For most people, depression gets better with treatment. Counseling, medicine, or other forms of treatment can help. You do not need to suffer — help and treatment options are available. Talk with your doctor if you think you might have depression.

There are several types of depression that older adults may experience:

Major Depressive Disorder – includes symptoms lasting at least two weeks that interfere with a person’s ability to perform daily tasks
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) – a depressed mood that lasts more than two years, but the person may still be able to perform daily tasks, unlike someone with Major Depressive Disorder
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder – depression related to the use of substances, like alcohol or pain medication
Depressive Disorder Due to A Medical Condition – depression related to a separate illness, like heart disease or multiple sclerosis.
Other forms of depression include psychotic depression, postmenopausal depression, and seasonal affective disorder. Find detailed descriptions of different types of depression from the National Institute of Mental Health.

Contact someone if you need help
If you are thinking about harming yourself, tell someone who can help immediately.

Do not isolate yourself.
Call a trusted family member or friend.
Call 911 or go to a hospital emergency room to get immediate help.
Make an appointment with your doctor.
Call the 24-hour 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline: 988 or 800-273-TALK (800-273-8255) or 800-799-4TTY (800-799-4889).

What are risk factors of depression?
There are many things that may be risk factors of depression. For some people, changes in the brain can affect mood and result in depression. Others may experience depression after a major life event, like a medical diagnosis or a loved one’s death. Sometimes, those under a lot of stress — especially people who care for loved ones with a serious illness or disability — can feel depressed. Others may become depressed for no clear reason.

Research has shown that these factors are related to the risk of depression, but do not necessarily cause depression:

Medical conditions, such as stroke or cancer
Genes – people who have a family history of depression may be at higher risk
Stress, including caregiver stress
Sleep problems
Social isolation and loneliness
Lack of exercise or physical activity
Functional limitations that make engaging in activities of daily living difficult
Addiction and/or alcoholism —included in Substance-Induced Depressive Disorder
Social isolation and depression in older adults
Everyone needs social connections to survive and thrive. But as people age, they often find themselves spending more time alone. Studies show that loneliness and social isolation are associated with higher rates of depression.

If you’re feeling socially isolated or lonely, and you cannot see your friends and family in person for any reason, try reaching out over the phone or joining a virtual club. Find tips to help you stay more connected.



What are signs and symptoms of depression?
Older woman with depression looking out a windowHow do you know if you or your loved one may have depression? Does depression look different as you age? Depression in older adults may be difficult to recognize because older people may have different symptoms than younger people. For some older adults with depression, sadness is not their main symptom. They could instead be feeling more of a numbness or a lack of interest in activities. They may not be as willing to talk about their feelings.

The following is a list of common symptoms. Still, because people experience depression differently, there may be symptoms that are not on this list.

Persistent sad, anxious, or "empty" mood
Feelings of hopelessness, guilt, worthlessness, or helplessness
Irritability, restlessness, or having trouble sitting still
Loss of interest in once pleasurable activities, including sex
Decreased energy or fatigue
Moving or talking more slowly
Difficulty concentrating, remembering, or making decisions
Difficulty sleeping, waking up too early in the morning, or oversleeping
Eating more or less than usual, usually with unplanned weight gain or loss
Thoughts of death or suicide, or suicide attempts
If you have several of these signs and symptoms and they last for more than two weeks, talk with your doctor. These could be signs of depression or another health condition. Don’t ignore the warning signs. If left untreated, serious depression may lead to death by suicide.

If you are a health care provider of an older person, ask how they are feeling during their visits. Research has shown that intervening during primary care visits is highly effective in reducing suicide later in life. If you are a family member or friend, watch for clues. Listen carefully if someone of any age says they feel depressed, sad, or empty for long periods of time. That person may really be asking for help. Knowing the warning signs for suicide and how to get help. It can help save lives.

Depression can look different depending on a person’s cultural background
Signs and symptoms of depression can look different depending on the person and their cultural background. People from different cultures may express emotions, moods, and mood disorders — including depression — in different ways. In some cultures, depression may be displayed as physical symptoms, such as aches or pains, headaches, cramps, or digestive problems.

Supporting friends and family with depression
Depression is a medical condition that requires treatment from a doctor. While family and friends can help by offering support in finding treatment, they cannot treat a person’s depression.

As a friend or family member of a person with depression, here are a few things you can do:

Encourage the person to seek medical treatment and stick with the treatment plan the doctor prescribes.
Help set up medical appointments or accompany the person to the doctor’s office or a support group.
Participate in activities the person likes to do.
Ask if the person wants to go for a walk or a bike ride. Physical activity can be great for boosting mood.
Talking with friends and family about suicide
It’s important to watch for signs and symptoms of depression or suicide. Don’t shy away from asking if a family member or friend is feeling depressed or suicidal. It may be an uncomfortable conversation, but it is important. Asking if someone is having thoughts of suicide will not make them more likely to act on those thoughts. Your questions may help the person open up about how they’ve been feeling and encourage them to seek treatment.

How is depression treated?
Depression, even severe depression, can be treated. It’s important to seek treatment as soon as you begin noticing signs. If you think you may have depression, start by making an appointment to see your doctor or health care provider.Older man talking to a therapist. 

Certain medications or medical conditions can sometimes cause the same symptoms as depression. A doctor can rule out these possibilities through a physical exam, learning about your health and personal history, and lab tests. If a doctor finds there is no medical condition that is causing the depression, he or she may suggest a psychological evaluation and refer you to a mental health professional such as a psychologist to perform this test. This evaluation will help determine a diagnosis and a treatment plan.

Common forms of treatment for depression include:

Psychotherapy, counseling, or “talk therapy” that can help a person identify and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behavior. It may be done with a psychologist, licensed clinical social worker (LCSW), psychiatrist, or other licensed mental health care professional. Examples of approaches specific to the treatment of depression include cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) and interpersonal therapy (IPT).
Medications for depression that may balance hormones that affect mood, such as serotonin. There are many different types of commonly used antidepressant medications. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are antidepressants commonly prescribed to older adults. A psychiatrist, mental health nurse practitioner, or primary care physician can prescribe and help monitor medications and potential side effects.
Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT), during which electrodes are placed on a person’s head to enable a safe, mild electric current to pass through the brain. This type of therapy is usually considered only if a person’s illness has not improved with other treatments.
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), which uses magnets to activate the brain. rTMS does not require anesthesia and targets only specific regions of the brain to help reduce side effects such as fatigue, nausea, or memory loss that could happen with ECT.
Medication and older adults
As you get older, body changes can affect the way medicines are absorbed and used. Because of these changes, there can be a larger risk of drug interactions among older adults. Share information about all medications and supplements you’re taking with your doctor or pharmacist.

Use this worksheet to help track your medications.

Treatment, particularly a combination of psychotherapy and medications, has been shown to be effective for older adults. However, not all medications or therapies will be right for everyone. Treatment choices differ for each person, and sometimes multiple treatments must be tried in order to find one that works. It is important to tell your doctor if your current treatment plan isn’t working and to keep trying to find something that does.

Some people may try complementary health approaches, like yoga, to improve well-being and cope with stress. However, there is little evidence to suggest that these approaches, on their own, can successfully treat depression. While they can be used in combination with other treatments prescribed by a person’s doctor, they should not replace medical treatment. Talk with your doctor about what treatment(s) might be good to try.

Don’t avoid getting help because you don’t know how much treatment will cost. Treatment for depression is usually covered by private insurance and Medicare. Also, some community mental health centers may offer treatment based on a person’s ability to pay.

Depression in people with dementia
Depression is common in people with Alzheimer’s and related dementias. Dementia can cause some of the same symptoms as depression, and depression can be an early warning sign of possible dementia. Suicide attempts may also increase in people recently diagnosed with dementia. It is important to have support systems in place to help cope with a dementia diagnosis and possible depression symptoms that follow. More research is needed to determine effective depression treatment options for people with dementia.

Can depression be prevented?
Many people wonder if depression can be prevented and how they may be able to lower their risk of depression. Although most cases of depression cannot be prevented, healthy lifestyle changes can have long-term benefits to your mental health.

Here are a few steps you can take:

Be physically active and eat a healthy, balanced diet. This may help avoid illnesses that can bring on disability or depression. Some diets — including the low-sodium DASH diet — have been shown to reduce risk of depression.
Get 7-9 hours of sleep each night.
Stay in touch with friends and family.
Participate in activities you enjoy.
Let friends, family, and your physician know when you’re experiencing symptoms of depression.
Easing Depression in Older Adults
En españolSend us your comments(link sends e-mail)
Man chatting with grandson while fishing.My Agency / Shutterstock
Depression is common among older adults. But treatment with the standard type of drugs, called antidepressants, doesn’t always work. When depression remains after trying a couple of these drugs, it hasn’t been clear what approach might be best.

Researchers studied over 600 adults, ages 60 and older, who had hard-to-treat depression. Participants were divided into three groups. One group added the drug aripiprazole (Abilify) to their prescribed antidepressant. The second group added an antidepressant called bupropion (Wellbutrin). The third group stopped taking their prescribed antidepressant and switched to bupropion.

After 10 weeks, the group that added aripiprazole showed the most improvements. They had a significant increase in well-being compared with the group that switched to bupropion. The groups with either of the added drugs had less depression symptoms than the group that switched to bupropion. Symptoms improved in 29% of patients with added aripiprazole and 28% of patients with added bupropion. But they improved in only 19% of those who switched to bupropion.

“Often, unless a patient responds to the first treatment prescribed for depression, physicians follow a pattern in which they try one treatment after another until they land on an effective medication,” says lead researcher Dr. Eric J. Lenze of the Washington University in St. Louis. “It would be beneficial to have an evidence-based strategy we can rely on to help patients feel better as quickly as possible.”
